Ameren
1997 Annual Report
PROCESSED BY
54-54= I
MAR 16 1998
DISCLOSURE INC.
сокр
98 02 5107
AR/S
12-31-97
Positioned for SuccessAmeren
Ameren UE
Ameren CIPS
Union Electric Company and CIPSCO
Incorporated merged to form a new utility
holding company, Ameren Corporation.A Snapshot of Ameren Corporation
Your New Company
With $9 billion in assets,
Ameren ranks
among the top
25 investor-owned utilities in
the United States. Ameren
operating companies' overall
electric rates are 14% below the
national average for investor-
owned utilities, with its resi-
dential rates falling 17% below
that
average, its commercial
rates 21% and its industrial
rates 9% below that average.
Residential customers
account for 35% of Ameren's
electric revenues; industrial
customers, 16%; commercial
customers, 30%; interchange
customers, 7%; EEI customers,
7%; and wholesale and other
customers, 5% of the total.
Ameren UE serves 1,1 million
electric customers in 66
Missouri and four Illinois
counties and provides natural
gas to 124,000 customers in
90 Missouri and three Illinois
communities. AmerenCIPS
provides electricity to 323,000
customers in 557 Illinois
communities and natural
170,000 customers in 267
gas to
communities representing
about 7% of the state's popula-
tion and 35% of its surface area.
With 44,500 square miles
of service territory in Missouri
and Illinois, the corporation's
operating companies support
7,308 miles of natural gas
mains and 42,204 pole miles
of overhead transmission and
distribution lines. The corpora-
tion's operating companies are
directly connected to 28 other
electric utility systems.
Ameren has a 60% interest
in Electric Energy, Inc. (EEI).
EEI owns and operates an
electric generating and trans-
mission facility in Illinois that
supplies electric power to a
uranium enrichment plant
located in Paducah, Kentucky.
Ameren UE Power Plants
(all in Missouri, except for the Venice and Keokuk Plants)
Labadie Plant, Franklin County
2,300 megawatts
Meramec Plant, St. Louis County
877 megawatts
Rush Island Plant, Jefferson County
1,158 megawatts
Sioux Plant, St. Charles County
952 megawatts
Venice Plant, Venice, IL
429 megawatts
Keokuk Plant, Keokuk, IA
125 megawatts
Osage Plant, Miller County
212 megawatts
Taum Sauk Plant, Reynolds County
350 megawatts
Callaway Nuclear Plant, Callaway County
1,137 megawatts
Ameren
Territory
Kansas City
Kirksville
Columbia
Jefferson City
MISSOURI
Quincy
AmerenCIPS Power Plants
(all in llinois)
Newton Plant, Jasper County
1,110 megawatts
Coffeen Plant, Montgomery County
900 megawatts
Meredosia Plant, Morgan County
507 megawatts
Hutsonville Plant, Crawford County
156 megawatts
Grand Tower Plant, Jackson County
186 megawatts
St. Louis
Chicago
ILLINOIS
Springfield
Cape
Girardeau
Paxton
Carbondale
Effingham
AmerenUE Service Area
AmerenCIPS Service Area
Power Plants
Electric Energy, Inc. (EEI)Defining Ameren
Welcome to Ameren Corporatoil
Ameren was created by the 1997 merger of Union Electric
Company and CIPSCO Incorporated, parent company of
Springfield-based Central Illinois Public Service Company.
We chose the name to reflect our geographic roots and core
business American energy. Investors in Ameren common
stock will now find us on the New York Stock Exchan
under AEE-not UEP or CIP.
====
Merger completion also brought new designations to
Ameren Corporation's operating companies: Union Electric
Company became known as AmerenUE and Central Illinois
Public Service Company as AmerenCIPS.
However, this merger is about much more than our new
logo or ticker symbol. The merger brings together two low-cost
energy providers. Ameren's electric utility rates are 14% below
the national average for investor-owned utilities. In fact, Ameren
also includes an affiliate pursuing other energy-related business
opportunities and power marketing transactions - Ameren
Energy, Inc. Because of all of these developments, we chose
as our theme for the 1997 annual report, "Positioned for
Success." To ensure that success, we will continue to effec-
tively and efficiently manage operations and expand our
core business.
And, in hundreds of communities we serve, Ameren's
operating companies and subsidiaries will remain deeply
committed to serving customers efficiently and effectively.
Again, welcome to Ameren!
AmerenUE
AmerenUE ranks as Missouri's
largest electric utility and is the third
largest distributor of natural gas in
the state. The company also serves
four counties in southwestern
Illinois. Its headquarters are in
St. Louis, MO.
Ameren Energy
A new energy marketing subsidiary,
Ameren Energy will pursue non-utility
business opportunities, focusing on
power marketing transactions, serving
as a power marketing agent for the
operating companies and providing a
range of energy and risk management
services to targeted customers.
Ameren
Ameren Environmental Safety & Health Engineer
Lisa Meyer dons a new Ameren hard hat.
Ameren
Ameren UE
Ameren CIPS
AmerenCIPS
AmerenCIPS provides energy services
to approximately 323,000 electric and
170,000 natural gas customers
throughout a 20,000-square-mile region
of central and southern Illinois. Its
headquarters are in Springfield, IL.
Ameren Services
This subsidiary provides administra-
tive support services - everything
from accounting to information
technology - to Ameren and its
operating companies and affiliates.
CIPSCO Investment Company (CIC)
CIC directs non-regulated investments, including
leases, securities and energy projects.Highlights
Ameren Consolidated
Earnings per Common Share
Net Income
Earnings per Common Share Before Extraordinary Charge
Income Before Extraordinary Charge
Book Value per Common Share
Property and Plant (net)
Total Operating Revenues
Total Kilowatthour Sales
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1 Highlights
2 Ameren Facts and Figures
3 Chairman's Letter
6 Anticipating Customer Needs
8 Extending Energy Partnerships
10 Operating Efficiently and Effectively
12 Operating Cleanly
14 Using Technology to Improve Service
16 Rethinking Who We Are
17 Responsibility for Financial Statements
and Report of Independent Accountants
18 Management's Discussion
and Analysis
24 Consolidated Balance Sheet
26 Consolidated Statement of Income
27 Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
28 Consolidated Statement of
Retained Earnings and Selected
Quarterly Information
29 Notes to Consolidated Financial
Statements
45 Selected Consolidated Financial
Information
46 Electric Operating Statistics
47 Gas Operating Statistics
48 Directors and Officers
49 Investor Information
Year Ended December 31, 1997 Current Year Change
$2.44
(10.0)%
(9.9)
4.1
4.0
0.1
$334,716,000
$2.82
$386,536,000
$22.00
$6,987,085,000
$3,326,543,000
63,981,000,000
0.5
(0.7)
About Ameren
With the merger of Union Electric Company and CIPSCO Incorporated, a new holding
company, Ameren Corporation, became the parent of St. Louis-based Union Electric
Company (UE) and Springfield, IL-based Central Illinois Public Service Company
(CIPS) - formerly the principal operating company of CIPSCO Incorporated. UE and
CIPS are now known as AmerenUE and AmerenCIPS.
About the Cover
On the cover is Ameren Corporation's new logo — a visual expression of the new
corporation's identity. Although its meaning is deliberately open to interpretation, this
graphic landscape reflects the energy and heartland origins of Ameren as the name
reflects our geographic roots and core business - American energy. Going forward, we
expect customers and investors to associate the Ameren name and corporate identity
with shareholder value, quality service and financial strength.
Who We Are
St. Louis-based Ameren Corporation (NYSE: AEE) provides energy services to 1,5 million
electric and 300,000 natural gas customers in Missouri and Illinois. Approximately 92% of
the company's $3.3 billion revenues flow from electric sales, with the remainder from sales
of natural gas. The company prides itself on a long, successful tradition of cost contain-
ment, low rates and continuous customer service improvements.
How We Did in 1997
Our approximately 8,150 Ameren employees successfully expanded the installation of
automated meters, earned high ratings for safety and operating efficiency at Callaway
Nuclear Plant, and, with fewer employees, shepherded the merger between Union
Electric and CIPSCO Incorporated through the final stages of the regulatory process.
What's Ahead
We continue to prepare for competition, remaining active in efforts to shape both
restructuring and environmental regulation and legislation to protect both our
customers and shareholders. We will focus on accelerating merger savings and realizing
other expense reductions. We expect to build upon the creation of our new energy
marketing subsidiary, Ameren Energy, Inc. to sell both electricity and natural gas and a
range of
energy services to targeted customers, and to use our position as a low-cost
utility to respond to the challenges of a more competitive environment.
Positioned for Success 1Ameren Facts and Figures
Earnings per Common Share
2.69
1.371
'93
2.85
'94
* Excluding extraordinary charge of 38 cents per share.
..... ازرار
18.9
porąziły
'93
'94
2.72
Productivity (number of customers per employee)
Fuel Costs (average cost per kilowatthour)
MANE
1.199
1.194
1.198
95
194
'94
2 Ameren 1997 Annual Report
2.71
202
'95
'96
210
2.82* 2.80
'96
'97
1.150
$2.90
¹97
217
'97
2.70
2.60
2.50
1,4€
1.3
1.2
1.1
Business Sales (in billions)
Commercial and Industrial Kilowatthour Sales
220
210
200
190
180
170
Competitive Rates (average revenue per kilowatthour)
8.93
7.38
1,137
6,101
6.13
687
7.80
Ameren UE
Nuclear
Fossil
Hydro
4.35
Generation Capacity (net, in megawatts)
Residential Commercial Industrial
Ameren Operating Companies Average
National Average (At June 30, 1997 - Edison Electric Institute).
2,859
4.79
26.4
AmerenCIPS
6.08
Total Retail
1,137
7.06
8,960
687
Ameren
27
26
25
24
23
9¢
co
8
7
6
4
10,000
8,000
6,000
4,000
2,000
0Ameren
7
To Our Owners
B
-
almost any measure, 1997 was a
remarkable and demanding — year.
With the long-awaited completion of
the merger between Union Electric and
CIPSCO Incorporated, we became Ameren
Corporation. Ameren is the parent company of
two operating companies - Union Electric
Company, now known as Ameren UE, and
Central Illinois Public Service Company, now
known as AmerenCIPS.
1997 Financial Performance
In 1997, our company earned $335 million,
or $2.44 per share. Earnings for 1997 included
an extraordinary charge of $52 million, net of
income taxes, or 38 cents per share, which
resulted from recent Illinois deregulation legis-
lation. Excluding the extraordinary charge,
earnings for 1997 were $2.82 per share, com-
pared to per-share earnings of $2.71 in 1996.
Earnings were affected by several factors,
including a $20 million credit expected to be
distributed in 1998 to our Missouri electric
customers. That credit reduced 1997 per-share
earnings 8 cents. The credit results from a
1995 agreement approved by the Missouri
Public Service Commission. That agreement
created an innovative alternative rate regulation
plan for sharing earnings between shareholders
and customers.
Chairman's Letter
:
Kilowatthour sales declined approximately
1%, primarily due to lower interchange market
and residential sales, which decreased 13% and
1%, respectively. However, commercial and
industrial sales for the year rose 1% and 2%,
respectively thanks to a stable regional econ-
omy. Unemployment in the St. Louis metro-
politan area at year-end 1997 was just 3.5%,
compared to a 4.6% rate for the nation. Since
1995, our region has added more than 55,000
new jobs. Metropolitan
St. Louis ranked among
the top third in the race
for jobs in a comparison
of 33 competing metro-
politan areas and, in
1997, recorded a 6.3%
employment growth rate - ahead of areas like
Denver, Charlotte and San Antonio.
Recognizing that economic development
increases revenues, we were instrumental in a
number of initiatives, both in Illinois and
Missouri, to attract commerce and industry to
our service area. For example, in 1997 we
played a major role in attracting a Procter &
Gamble plant that will bring 350 new jobs to
southeast Missouri.
Notable 1997 Events
Our year was characterized by efficient use
of resources and expanded service options for
all customers.
In 1997, our Callaway Nuclear Plant, in a
period of increased regulatory scrutiny, again
Positioned for Success 3Chairman's Letter
earned excellent ratings from the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission. In fact, the Callaway
plant had some of the highest scores awarded
for any plant evaluated in 1997 - three "supe-
rior" ratings and one "good" mark. Callaway
remains one of the nation's safest plants.
■ Our Ameren UE power plants continued
to use substantial quantities of lower cost, low-
sulfur Western coal, which greatly reduces sul-
fur dioxide emissions. AmerenCIPS power
plants began preparations for testing the use of
Western coal and revamped controls to
improve operational efficiencies.
■ Network meter reading units - automat-
ed electric meters that are read remotely - are
now in 550,000 homes and businesses in the
St. Louis area. In 1997, we became the opera-
tor of the largest network meter reading system
in the world. With this network, we can pro-
vide greater information on customer usage,
respond to outages more quickly and offer a
range of new customer services. In 1997, we
also installed 1,300 automated natural gas
meters. For both natural gas and electric ser-
vice, we are working with the vendor involved
in this project to pioneer the introduction of
automated meters in rural areas,
■ The year also marked the formation of
our energy services and marketing company,
Ameren Energy. This new affiliate will sell
energy - both electricity and natural
gas
and a range of energy services to targeted
customers in new markets. We named an
experienced professional with expertise in
energy marketing and risk management
Shannon B. Burchett - as the new president
of Ameren Energy.
■ In December 1997, the Missouri Public
Service Commission approved an increase in
our Missouri natural gas rates, which annually
will add $11.5 million to revenues, beginning
in the first quarter of 1998.
■ Cliff Greenwalt, president and CEO of
CIPSCO, retired at the end of 1997, after a
34-year career at the company; he remains
involved with Ameren as a member of the
newly named Ameren board of directors. Cliff
has capped his remarkable career with the for-
mation of Ameren Corporation, and we salute
him for his steadfast determination to lead his
company through this process with dignity.
Now that we have completed our merger, we are aggressively
focusing on accelerating merger cost savings and realizing other
expense reductions.
4 Ameren 1997 Annual Report
Electric Industry Restructuring
In Illinois
In Illinois, recently enacted legislation gives
customers the right to choose their electricity
providers. Large commercial and industrial cus-
tomers get provider choice by 1999, with all
business and residential customers able to
choose providers by 2002. In addition, the law
includes a provision that allows utilities to
recover a portion of its stranded costs and gives
our Illinois residential electric customers a 5%
rate decrease, beginning August 1, 1998.
Further rate decreases may be required in 2000
and 2002 if our Illinois electric rates do not
remain below the Midwest average. The new
law also removes the regulatory requirement
that we file electric rate cases in
Illinois - a condition of merger
approval that had been in place.
In addition, the new law pro-
vides the opportunity to elimi-
nate the retail fuel adjustment
clause and to roll into base rates a historical
level of fuel expense, as well as the opportunity
to securitize certain future revenues.
Electric Industry Restructuring
In Missouri
In September 1997, we filed with the
Missouri Public Service Commission a pro-
posed structure for implementing a 100-
megawatt pilot program that is designed to
offer provider choice to a select number of
Ameren UE electric customers. The proposed
pilot project would give us added experience
and information needed to manage the transi-
tion to a competitive market. In addition, in
1997 a public service commission task force
and a state legislative committee began study-
ing approaches for creating competition in
:Missouri. One of our senior officers is a mem-
ber of the task force; other executives serve as
advisers. The legislative committee may be
drafting a proposal in 1998, after the task force
completes its study. We will continue to be
very active in shaping these proposals so that
Missouri will have an orderly transition to a
competitive era.
Environmental Issues
On the environmental front, the federal
government has proposed or mandated several
stringent, technically flawed reduction targets
for emission of various gases - even though
air quality has improved markedly since the
passage of the Clean Air Act
and its amendments. Science
has not shown that any of these
new standards will significantly
improve public health, and
imposing them could be devas-
tating to the nation's economy
and very costly to your company and its cus-
tomers. We are working aggressively to oppose
such standards and to propose alternatives.
expenses related to new air quality standards.
While I recognize that this is not encourag-
ing news, this information does reflect the
uncertainties Ameren and other energy compa-
nies face. Let me assure you that the Ameren
management team will be redoubling its efforts
to address and overcome the pressures on
future earnings. Now that we have completed
our merger, we are aggressively focusing on
accelerating merger cost savings and realizing
other expense reductions. We will continue to
focus on developing our core energy business
for additional growth opportunities. Also, with
the formation of Ameren Energy, we expect to
maximize the value of our strategic generating
We continue to be committed to enhancing shareholder value
and will be capitalizing on opportunities to bring that value to
you as soon as possible.
In Summary
Clearly, challenging times lie ahead for
Ameren and the utility industry. Early in 1998,
we issued a news release cautioning investors
that 1998 earnings would likely be lower than
1997 earnings, excluding the extraordinary
charge mentioned earlier. We cited several fac-
tors that are contributing to our projections,
including lower revenues, due to 1998 rate
decreases in Missouri and Illinois. We also
pointed to anticipated higher operations and
maintenance expenses, including those for
refueling Callaway in the spring of 1998 and
for information system-related projects. In
addition, start-up costs associated with Ameren
Energy will reduce 1998 earnings modestly.
Earnings pressure may continue beyond
1998 as the company and the entire electric
utility industry address the impact of a number
of issues, including potentially lower revenues
and higher operating expenses associated with
industry restructuring, as well as potentially
higher capital expenditures and operating
assets and to increase earnings, both through
national marketing of electricity and natural
gas and through the sale of a range of energy
and risk management services. We continue to
be committed to enhancing shareholder value
and will be capitalizing on opportunities to
bring that value to you as soon as possible.
Finally, our gratitude goes to our employees
and directors for their dedication and hard
work in creating a new energy company. We
appreciate your support over the past year,
especially in this demanding period.
Sincerely,
Cutmueller
Charles W. Mueller
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer
February 10, 1998
Positioned for Success 5We are delivering a portfolio of quality products and services,
while maintaining a clear identity, a consistently high level of
quality and a single point of contact for key business customers.
Forget flashy new models
and features.
In the intensely competitive
world of auto manufacturing, the
business imperative is: slash your
costs or else.
Introduced in 1997, this wire-
less, radio-based metering system
helps the St. Louis Ford assembly
plant managers track energy use
across the facility - from the
body shop to the paint shop and
beyond. In fact, Ford engineers in
Detroit get simultaneous access to
the same data by logging on to a
secure site on the Internet.
POSITIONED FOR GROWTH
Anticipating
Customer Needs
Ameren's Abacus helps Ford
and other business customers do
just that.
Abacus is a wireless energy
management tool that allows
customers to monitor energy use
within each building, department
or production process to help
them make informed operating
decisions.
The project got its start with
Mike Pitchford, Ameren key
account executive and one of the
executives charged with offering
large industrial and commercial
customers everything from a sin-
David Guard, who oversees devel-
opment of new technology, and
Product Management Supervisor
Keith Brightfield (right) explore the
offerings of Ameren's new Abacus
product a wireless energy man-
agement tool allowing customers
to monitor energy use by location
or production process.
gle point of contact to the exper-
tise of a team of professionals.
Why offer additional services
to an automaker? Because valued
energy management services dif-
ferentiate Ameren from its com-
petitors. And the lower our energy
rates and the more service rela-
tionships we maintain with each
6 Ameren 1997 Annual Report
customer, the greater the likeli-
hood we can retain that cus-
tomer in a competitive market.
To attract new customers,
Ameren is bidding for energy
management services contracts
with multiple industrial and insti-
tutional customers. In addition, the
corporation's diversified energy
services and marketing company
- Ameren Energy - will offer
integrated solutions to customers'
energy needs, selling electricity
and natural gas in addition to
އLCE ItKu
alkar á. Guð133
A
energy and risk management ser-
vices to targeted customers. Also,
through partnerships with major
design and engineering firms,
Ameren affiliates are pursuing non-
utility ventures that involve a range
of activities from providing energy
efficiency technologies and advisory
services to designing, building and
operating steam heat and chilled
water systems for large institution-
al and industrial customers...
AMEREN HELPS CUSTOMERS
MANAGE ENERGY COSTS
St. Louis Ford Motor assembly
plant is one of two U.S. sites manu-
facturing the nation's leading sport
utility vehicle
the Ford Explorer.
The St. Louis assembly plant turns
out 50 Explorers every hour.
"It's critical that we control our ener-
gy costs and that we have power that is
uninterrupted. A single voltage dip can
affect our entire process. AmerenUE has worked hard through its Key Account Program to
respond to our needs, cutting outages by more than 50% and providing a valuable information
source for our energy use in a range of plant areas.
Vincent E. Kelly
Plant Engineering Manager, Ford Motor Company. St. Louis Assembly Plant
TECHPART
Positioned for Success 7AMEREN HELPS CUSTOMERS GROW
Zinc production began at the Sauget, IL, site of
Big River Zinc Corporation in 1929. Now a wholly
owned subsidiary of Korea Zinc Company, Ltd.,
Big River produces about 92,000 tons of zinc each
year, in addition to manufacturing sulfuric acid and
cadmium oxide at its modern plant across the
Mississippi River from downtown St. Louis.
"AmerenUE is helping us grow. I've been
impressed with the company's cooperative
approach. The AmerenUE team has been willing to
work hard to improve reliability. The Ameren key
account executive has been an ally - someone who
is willing to fight for us in making everyone realize
that we must achieve critical bottom line goals."
George Obeldobel
President. Big Rivers Zinc Corporation
Big River Zinc's hard-charging
president may joke about his stint
mining gold in South America, but
he is dead serious about AmerenUE
electricity: Big River Zinc's President
George Obeldobel says his compa-
ny uses enough power daily to
light a city of 20,000.
Electricity accounts for about
33% of the direct cost of refining
the 92,000 tons of zinc produced
annually at this Sauget, IL, manu-
facturer. Over the years,
AmerenUE has improved reliability
and offered a range of energy
advisory services to the Sauget
refinery. In 1997, AmerenUE
placed Big River Zinc's plant
expansion on a discounted eco-
nomic development rate. That
expansion will increase Big River
Zinc's refining capacity almost
30%. Ameren's team members -
Illinois District Sales Supervisor
Bill Hutchings and Key Account
Executive Darrell Hughes -
AMA
ALIn 1997, AmerentlE centralized
regional dispatching and
installed new technology in
each region to provide even
faster response to customers
when the lights go out.
are also exploring other rate struc-
tures that would help this cus-
tomer reduce energy costs, while
benefiting your company.
Economic development was
also the focus of several other
Extending
Energy
Partnerships
marketing initiatives in Illinois,
where in 1997, we offered a range
of computer-based information
sources to relocating or expanding
companies. Both in Illinois and
Missouri, we brought prospective
borrowers to financial institutions
interested in providing expedited
equipment or project financing.
In Illinois, another Ameren
industrial development program
offers qualifying communities a
ACHT
"ready-to-go-site" --- with a com-
plete industrial infrastructure in
place. Interested companies get
blueprints, building specifications
and a color rendering of a pre-
qualified building. Through yet
another utility-community part-
nership, Ameren is purchasing
natural gas for municipal systems,
providing training to municipal
employees on gas systems and
maintaining natural gas facilities
for certain communities.
In the end, we realize that
both residential and business cus-
tomers want low-priced, highly
reliable energy and simple, hassle-
free service - plus affordable
products that match their needs.
Delivering on all of this will keep
our customers coming back to
Ameren for more..
At our Johnston City, II, natural gas
storage field, Emma Cruthis, gas supply
and transportation specialist, discusses
pipeline supplies with Kiel Peebles, gas
utility journeyman storage operator.
Cruthis monitors and markets any
underutilized capacity on our lines,
selling excess capacity to ensure com-
petitive pricing for natural gas distrib-
uted by AmerenCIPS and AmerenUE.
Positioned for Success 9Ameren backs its commitment to protect the environment
with action, significantly reducing emissions from power
plants and investing in technology to carefully monitor
water, soil and habitat conditions.
Granted, it may not be revolution-
ary but a stroll through Ameren
operations captures the scope of
some of our efficiency gains.
POSITIONED FOR PERFORMANCE
Operating
Efficiently
and Effectively
Look first at the natural gas
distribution business where
Ameren is centralizing the pur-
chase and scheduling of gas and
consolidating meter testing,
engineering design and material
specification for Missouri and
Illinois gas systems. To accommo-
date more flexible service offer-
ings, both Ameren companies
also remotely read natural gas
meters at 300 large natural gas
customers.
A visit to regional locations
shows that the 1997 completion
of the AmerenCIPS reorganization
from three divisions to eight
regions has sharpened employees'
focus on better service and
brought employees closer to cus-
tomers. Each region's customers
Engineer Richard Speraneo (left) and
Craftsman Mark Newman are mem-
bers of Coffeen Plant teams charged
with averhauling a turbine and
other equipment as part of an
extensive outage at the AmerenCIPS
plant. They are pictured here with
the rotor of a recently refurbished
drive turbine.
10 Ameren 1997 Annual Report
began using the centralized call
center in Pawnee, IL, in a process
that began in 1996 and was com-
pleted in July 1997. Moving to
the call center concept allowed
AmerenCIPS to expand customer
AmerenCIPS has millions of cubic feet of natural
gas storage space in four underground storage
fields in Illinois. Gas from the storage fields, like
this one near Johnston City, B., is used during peri-
ods of high demand. Storage fields supplement
natural gas being delivered by interstate pipelines
and help cut costs by reducing the amount of
pipeline capacity that must be held under contract.
MALI
JAservice by making customer ser-
vice representatives available for
longer hours. Thanks to a 1997
AmerenCIPS call center link with
the AmerenUE customer service
center, Ameren customers across
both Illinois and Missouri can con-
tact a service representative by
dialing a toll-free number 24-
hours a day, seven days a week.
On the generating side of the
business, in 1997 Ameren UE's
Callaway Nuclear Plant opera-
tions continued to win positive
notice. The Nuclear Regulatory
Commission awarded the plant
"superior" ratings ("1's") in
maintenance, engineering and
plant support and a "good" rat-
ing ("2") in operations during its
1997 Systematic Assessment of
Licensee Performance.
And at the AmerenCIPS Coffeen
Plant, self-directed work teams
orchestrated a major maintenance
and repair effort, rebuilding a tur-
bine and boiler, among other pro-
jects. They completed the Unit 1
overhaul in 28% fewer manhours
than were necessary for previous
outages. Compared to 1995 costs,
Coffeen reduced construction costs
20% in 1997 through increased
monitoring and tracking of con-
struction activities.
AMEREN CREATES STRONG CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIPS
The Pevely, MO, plant of Ball-Foster Glass Container Co. makes 2.5 million beverage bottles
daily all for the Anheuser-Busch companies.
"Our high-temperature glass-making process is sensitive to heat transfer and time and tem-
perature relationships. Loss of power disrupts process stability, causing production losses and
cost increases. Our strong relationship with AmerenUE is based on our having reliable, quality
power, good pricing and responsive, innovative
service. After difficulties with our energy supply in
1996, AmerenUE, through its key account execu-
tive (Mike Pitchford), stepped up to the challenge.
coming up with solutions for our reliability prob-
lems. It is important that energy suppliers view
my company as a customer not just a ratepayer.
I can honestly say that AmerenUE is working hard
to meet my objectives for low-cost, reliable energy."
Jim Keener
Plant Manager, Ball-Foster Glass Container Co., LLC
A
3Stens
6
AMEREN PARTNERS WITH CUSTOMERS
FOR COMPETITIVE ADVANTAGE
The Marathon Oil Company refinery at Robinson, IL,
built in 1906, is one of the larger refineries of petrole-
um products in the Midwest. For decades, the company
has been a customer of AmerenCIPS.
"The oil industry is intensely competitive. Outside of raw materials, our largest expense is
energy - electricity accounts for 10% of our operating costs, so for us. price is a critical issue.
But so is the quality of our energy. We must have a continuous energy supply because power
losses can shut us down for days. Through our partnership with AmerenCIPS, we have participat-
ed in a national research study that has helped us identify opportunities for energy savings. We
can now better integrate the energy needs of each of our units. And our key account executive.
Wade Miller, and others have made a great effort to ensure that we have outstanding reliability."
Dennis U. Kummerer
Division Controller, Illinois Refining Division, Marathon Oil Company
12 Ameren 1997 Annual Report
It was a deceptively simple solu-
tion to a devilishly difficult problem.
Thanks to engineering ingenu-
ity, AmerenUE's Sioux Plant
became one of the first U.S.
plants to improve technology
used for reducing nitrogen oxide
(NOx) produced by cyclone boil-
ers. The cost for this "fix" was
one-tenth that of the next lowest
cost option - burning natural gas
–––Ö€550wwwwww
in addition to coal.
By mid-1997, AmerenUE had
cut nitrogen oxide emissions at
its power plants by 50%, com-
pared to 1990 levels, while
increasing the amount of coal
burned by nearly a third.
However, engineers across the
nation pondered what to do with
cyclone boilers that mix air and
coal in a cyclonic motion at
NI
power plants, like AmerenUE's
Sioux Plant and AmerenCIPS'
Coffeen Plant. The challenge at
these plants was to delay - or
stage the burning of fuel in
lower levels of the boiler at tem-
peratures where nitrogen and
oxygen are less likely to combine.
But those delays can cause prob-
lems with corrosion of boiler
tubes and the removal of molten
slag, resulting in operating prob-
lems in the cyclone boiler.
Teams from the Electric PowerResearch Institute, the industry's
research arm, and AmerenUE
spent months with computer
models and boiler tests before
Nitrogen oxide emissions at Sioux
Plant are being controlled through
a simple solution-a duct system
that moves air out of the cyclone
burners and into a different part of
the boiler. Behind this solution were
Ameren Engineers (not shown,
Keith Stuckmeyer) and, from left,
Kenneth Stuckmeyer, Supervising
Engineer Richard Smith and Senior
Engineer David Ball.
ALTIP
Ameren engineers designed and
installed an ingenious duct sys-
tem. They linked that system to
the main air supply of the plant's
boiler. Through a staged process,
these ducts divert some air away
from the cyclone burners to a
different part of the boiler, while
clean low-sulfur Western coal into
the plant. Since the 1970s,
AmerenUE has reduced by more
than 65% the sulfur dioxide emit-
ted from its coal-fired power
plants. AmerenCIPS has cut its sul-
fur dioxide emissions by 60%.
The need to reduce produc-
Operating
Cleanly
avoiding the operating problems
this normally creates.
Also in 1997, Sioux Plant
installed controls to improve boiler
efficiency and improved its coal
handling and processing systems
to move more environmentally
tion costs and to further reduce
sulfur dioxide emissions led to a
test burn of lower cost Western
coal at Meramec Plant in early
1997. After a successful test
burn, Meramec continued to
burn a blend of Western and
Illinois coals. In 1997, Western
coal accounted for 56% of
Meramec's total coal burn.
AmerenUE bought more than 13
million tons of Western coal dur-
ing the year an all-time record.
However, Ameren - and all
U.S. industry - may soon face the
challenge of meeting newly
revised federal air quality stan-
dards for ozone and particulate
matter. Requiring significant addi-
tional reductions in sulfur dioxide
and nitrogen oxide emissions from
coal-fired boilers, these revised
standards will not only challenge
our ingenuity but demand sub-
stantial additional capital expendi-
tures if they withstand legislative
and other challenges.
L
Coal handling system improvements at
Sioux Plant increased the amount of
Western coal that could be moved into
the boilers. Sioux's coal crushers were
replaced to grind the coal to a finer con-
sistency all to improve operating per-
formance, reduce production costs and
comply with environmental regulations.
Positioned for Success
13
W
-—-——..
ļ
:The 20th century began as a
period of war, grew into the
Atomic era and seems to be end-
ing as the Age of Technology.
Ameren is using technology as
an important ally in improving ser-
vice reliability and responsiveness.
In fact, AmerenUE now has
the largest network meter reading
system in the world, with 550,000
radio-based wireless network
meters installed in the homes and
businesses of St. Louis-area electric
customers. By the first quarter of
1999, AmerenUE will have placed
automated meters in more than
800,000 customer sites, reducing
costs in reading, maintaining and
replacing meters. The system paves
the way for such services as off-
peak pricing, flexible billing options
and an array of information and
energy management systems.
To provide this new service,
Ameren UE contracted with Cell Net
Data Systems of San Carlos, CA -
the largest wireless, fixed-network
data gathering and distribution
automation company in the U.S.
The new technology is not lim-
ited to electric customers.
Installation of 1,300 automated
meters for natural gas customers
in AmerenUE's Wentzville, MO,
District began in 1997. The year
also marked the installation of the
first of 500 meters that perform
advanced metering for commercial
and industrial customers.
Thousands of these meters are
slated for installation by 1999.
Another technical milestone for
1997 was the completion of 72
distinct projects to merge and
integrate AmerenUE's and
AmerenCIPS' business systems,
upgrade other systems and con-
solidate the two companies' data
centers where information pro-
cessing occurs. In 1997, Ameren
Using Technology
To Improve Service
14 Ameren 1997 Annual Report
employees mastered the chal-
lenges of this massive initiative,
helping us operate efficiently as a
unified corporation as soon as
the merger was completed. This
effort, in addition to programs
that placed new technology in
customer locations to improve
reliability, all brought not only
increased efficiency but improved
Residential AmerenUE customers can now pay their bills on the Internet
through Pay-by-Web (Ameren's home page address is http://www.ameren.com).
This is only one of several bill payment services in AmerenUE's Customer
Choice portfolio of options. Those offerings also include Pay-by-Phone and
Direct Payment services that allow residential and small commercial
customers to authorize automatic deductions of both electric and natural gas
charges from checking accounts.wwwmarapaineessa.
...........
Volders at the ent
Plant overl: sun "A
1997 plant outage
fewer manus
472.00
AMEL36-19 DIG!9500s
TO REDUCE ENERGY CUSTS
Lafarge Corporation Cement Group's Joppa, IL,
Plant, annually manufactures one million tons of
cement for multiple markets -30% of the total
production goes to oil wells. Lafarge's Joppa oil well
cement is the market leader on the Gulf Coast.
"Over the 35 years we've been a customer of
AmerenCIPS, we have had a very good relationship.
It's been a mutually beneficial relationship. with our
key account executive (Jonathan Wheeler) playing a
major role in troubleshooting for us. offering advice and helping us reduce energy costs. Reliable.
quality power is critical to us - so is price. with energy accounting for 20% of our total costs.
Di
Lynn A. Wehrmeier
Plant Controller. Lafarge Corporation. Cement Group's Joppa Plant
customer service.
These initiatives included
analysis of the energy control
systems to handle joint dispatch
of power for all Ameren compa-
nies' power plants. They involved
tying customer information sys-
tems together so that everyone,
from those who dispatch crews
to those who answer customer
calls, has the same information
on the customer.
APARKE
Information technology staff
also overhauled all human
resources systems. Major account-
ing systems changes were neces-
sary to provide multi-company
financial reporting, while the
power plants of both companies
began to share management
information systems.
We realize our profitability
will come from providing innovative
new products and superior service.
We also realize we must have the
technology in place to provide
those products and high quality ser-
vice at a competitive advantage...
Positioned for Success 151
The pursuit of revenue and earnings growth
involves more than improving service, restruc-
turing and cutting costs. It also requires
changing attitudes.
A number of initiatives are now in place to
move employees toward operating as an inte-
POSITIONED FOR TEAMWORK
Rethinking
Who We Are
grated team with a shared purpose and a
renewed understanding of the financial realities
of a competitive environment.
Our development programs now focus on
defining values for success, understanding the
needs of customers, developing leadership and
building teamwork, trust and respect among
all employees.
In fact, a newly created development pro-
gram challenges employees to think about
the energy business from the outside in.
These hands-on training sessions feature four-
by-six-foot customized learning maps that
engage small groups of employees in a
detailed analysis of customer satisfaction and
loyalty, plus competitive trends and financial
issues that we may be facing.
Through this process, partici-
pants led by fellow employees
trained as meeting leaders -
make the connection between
their performance, their area's
efficiency and their impact on
Ameren's ability to compete.
16 Ameren 1997 Annual Report
Throughout Ameren, employ-
ees will continue to work in
teams often across operating
companies, departments, regions
and divisions to harness the
power of different perspectives, experiences
and skills.
3 DRIVING TOWARD LOYALTY AND PROFIT
MODA BEK
THE AT&T
P
En
More than 8,000 Ameren
employees are attending
sessions to encourage
dialogue and discovery; they
are using maps to analyze
and respond to the competi
tive, financial, and customer
loyalty issues associated
with the introduction of a
choice of energy providers.
Clockwise, starting at top
left and from left:
We are urging employees to take intelli-
gent risks. We are encouraging them to
approach their jobs with heightened market
understanding, greater creativity, a sense of
urgency and a renewed dedication to superior Plant; and Derek Mosley,
customer service.
David Fox, Rush Island Plant;
George Mosley, Labadie
Engineering & Construction.
SLUT
Matthew Herzberg, Organi-
zation Development, and
Kelly Bereysa, Dorsett
Training Center;
Robert Painter, Dorsett
District; Terry Smith, Rush
island Plant, and Quintella
Ballard, Minois District;
Betsy Finnegan, Organi-
zation Development, and
James Trevor Communi-
cations Services;
TER: 12481585kers.FINANCIAL TABLE OF CONTENTS
17 Responsibility for Financial Statements
and Report of Independent
Accountants
18 Management's Discussion
and Analysis
24
Consolidated Balance Sheet
26 Consolidated Statement of Income
27 Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
28 Consolidated Statement of
Retained Earnings and Selected
Quarterly Information
29 Notes to Consolidated Financial
Statements
45 Selected Consolidated Financial
Information
46 Electric Operating Statistics
47 Gas Operating Statistics
Responsibility for Financial Statements
The management of Ameren Corporation is responsible for the information and
representations contained in the consolidated financial statements and in other sections
of this Annual Report. The consolidated financial statements have been prepared in
conformity with generally accepted accounting principles. Other information included in
this report is consistent, where applicable, with the consolidated financial statements.
The Company maintains a system of internal accounting controls designed to
provide reasonable assurance as to the integrity of the financial records and the
protection of assets. Qualified personnel are selected and an organization structure
is maintained that provides for appropriate functional responsibility.
Written policies and procedures have been developed and are revised as neces-
sary. The Company maintains and supports an extensive program of internal audits
with appropriate management follow up.
The Board of Directors, through its Auditing Committee comprised of outside direc-
tors, is responsible for ensuring that both management and the independent accoun-
tants fulfill their respective responsibilities relative to the financial statements.
Moreover, the independent accountants have full and free access to meet with the
Auditing Committee, with or without management present, to discuss auditing or
financial reporting matters.
Report of Independent Accountants
February 5, 1998
Price Waterhouse LLP
800 Market Street
St. Louis, MO 63101
Telephone 314-206-8500
To the Stockholders and Board of Directors of Ameren Corporation
In our opinion, based upon our audits and the reports of other auditors, the accom-
panying consolidated balance sheet and the related consolidated statements of
income, of cash flows and retained earnings appearing on pages 24-28 of this report
present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of Ameren Corporation and
its subsidiaries at December 31, 1997 and 1996, and the results of their operations
and their cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31,
1997, in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles. These financial
statements are the responsibility of the Company's management; our responsibility is
to express an opinion on these financial statements based on our audits. We did not
audit the financial statements of Central Illinois Public Service Company and CIPSCO
Investment Company, wholly-owned subsidiaries, which combined statements reflect
total assets of $1,889,451,000 and $1,913,691,000 at December 31, 1997 and 1996,
respectively, and total revenues of $863,441,000, $891,631,000 and $837,216,000
for the three years in the period ended December 31, 1997, respectively. Those state-
ments were audited by other auditors whose reports thereon have been furnished to
us, and our opinion expressed herein, insofar as it relates to the amounts included for
Central Illinois Public Service Company and CIPSCO Investment Company, is based
solely on the reports of the other auditors. We conducted our audits of these state-
ments in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards which require that we
plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the finan-
cial statements are free of material misstatement. An audit includes examining, on a
test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial state-
ments, assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by
management, and evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. We believe
that our audits and the reports of other auditors provide a reasonable basis for the
opinion expressed above.
Prin Waterhomas IJ
Ameren
1718
OVERVIEW
Management's Discussion And Analysis
Ameren Corporation (Ameren) is a newly created holding company which is registered under the
Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935 (PUHCA), In December 1997, Union Electric Company
(AmerenUE) and CIPSCO Incorporated (CIPSCO) combined to form Ameren, with Ameren UE and
CIPSCO's subsidiaries, Central Illinois Public Service Company (AmerenCIPS) and CIPSCO Investment
Company (CIC) becoming wholly-owned subsidiaries of Ameren (the Merger). In addition, Ameren,
as a result of the Merger, has a 60% ownership interest in Electric Energy, Inc. (EEI), which is consoli-
dated for financial reporting purposes.
The Merger was accounted for as a pooling of interests; therefore the consolidated financial state-
ments are presented as if the Merger were consummated as of the beginning of the earliest period
presented. However, the consolidated financial statements are not necessarily indicative of the results
of operations, financial position or cash flows that would have occurred had the Merger been con-
summated for the periods for which it is given effect, nor is it necessarily indicative of the future
results of operations, financial position or cash flows.
References to the Company are to Ameren on a consolidated basis; however, in certain circum-
stances, the subsidiaries are separately referred to in order to distinguish between their different
business activities.
RESULTS OF Earnings. Earnings for 1997, 1996 and 1995, were $335 million ($2.44 per share), $372 million ($2.71
OPERATIONS per share) and $373 million ($2.72 per share), respectively. Earnings and earnings per share fluctuated
due to many conditions, primarily: weather variations, electric rate reductions, competitive market forces,
credits to electric customers, sales growth, fluctuating operating costs, including Callaway Plant nuclear
refueling outages, merger-related expenses, changes in interest expense, changes in income and property
taxes and an extraordinary charge.
The Company recorded an extraordinary charge to earnings in the fourth quarter of 1997 for the
write-off of generation-related regulatory assets and liabilities of the Company's Illinois retail electric
business as a result of electric industry restructuring legislation enacted in Illinois in December 1997.
The write-off reduced earnings $52 million, net of income taxes, or 38 cents per share. (See Note 2 -
Regulatory Matters under Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.)
Electric Operations. The impacts of the more significant items affecting electric revenues and operat-
ing expenses during the past three years are analyzed and discussed below:
Electric Revenues (Millions of Dollars)
Rate variations
Credit to customers
Effect of abnormal weather
Growth and other
Interchange sales
EE!
Variations from Prior Year
1997
1996
$
$(20)
(15)
(28)
67
28
3
5
(43)
9
$ 2
51
(2)
$53
1995
$(14)
(33)
63
51
(13)
(76)
$(22)
Electric revenues for 1997 were flat compared to 1996, reflecting a decrease in the Missouri electric cus-
tomer credits recorded in 1997 versus 1996 (see Note 2 - Regulatory Matters under Notes to Consolidated
Financial Statements for further information), partly offset by a 1% decrease in kilowatthour sales. The kilo-
watthour sales decrease was due to a 13% decrease in interchange sales due to market conditions and dif-
ferences in the classification of certain interchange and purchased power transactions resulting from the
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) Order 888 and a 1% decline in residential sales. These
decreases were partly offset by increases in commercial and industrial sales of 1% and 2%, respectively,
attributable to economic growth. In addition, sales at EEI were up 6% over 1996.
The increase in 1996 electric revenues was primarily due to a 5% increase in kilowatthour sales over the
prior year, partly offset by the 1.8% rate decrease for Missouri electric customers and the net increase in
Missouri electric customer credits recorded in 1996 versus 1995. (See Note 2 - Regulatory Matters under
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.) The kilowatthour sales increase reflected
economic growth in the service area and increased interchange sales opportunities, partially offset by milder
weather during the period. Residential and industrial sales each rose 2% over 1995, while commercial sales
grew 3% and interchange sales increased 32%.
The decrease in 1995 electric revenues was primarily the result of decreased sales to the Department
of Energy by EEI, a one-time $30 million credit to Missouri electric customers and rate decrease in
Missouri. (See Note 2 - Regulatory Matters under Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for furtherinformation.) This decrease was partially offset by increased retail kilowatthour sales, mainly due to the
unusually hot weather in the third quarter of 1995, compared to 1994, and sales growth reflecting the
Company's healthy service area economy. Weather-sensitive residential and commercial sales increased
6% and 3%, respectively, over 1994, and industrial sales grew 2%.
Fuel and Purchased Power (Millions of Dollars)
Fuel:
Variation in generation
Price
Generation efficiencies and other
Purchased power variation
ΕΕΙ
Variations from Prior Year
1997
1996
$ 25
(24)
(5)
(50)
10
$(44)
$43
(14)
2
2
23
$56
1995
$(10)
2
(42)
$(38)
The decrease in 1997 fuel and purchased power costs was primarily due to reduced purchased
power costs, resulting from relatively flat native load sales, lower interchange sales and lower fuel
prices, offset by greater generation. The increase in 1996 fuel and purchased power costs was driven
mainly by higher kilowatthour sales, partially offset by lower fuel prices due to the use of lower cost
coal. The decrease in 1995 fuel and purchased power costs reflected decreased sales by EEI, partly off-
set by greater retail kilowatthour sales during the hot 1995 summer and the need for replacement
power during Callaway Plant's spring nuclear refueling outage.
Gas Operations. Gas revenues in 1997 decreased $4 million primarily due to a 12% decrease in retail
dekatherm sales. Weather-sensitive residential and commercial sales declined 15% and 18%, respectively,
These decreases were partly offset by a 20% increase in industrial sales and an increase in off-system
sales of gas to others. The increase in 1996 gas revenues of $37 million was primarily the result of higher
gas prices and increased sales due to colder weather. Residential and commercial dekatherm sales
increased 13% and 17%, respectively, in 1996 versus 1995. Gas revenues decreased $8 million in 1995
primarily as a result of lower prices and lower industrial dekatherm sales.
Gas costs for 1997 remained flat as compared to those of 1996. The $35 million increase in 1996
gas costs was primarily the result of a combination of increased demand due to colder weather and an
increase in the price paid for gas in 1996 versus 1995. The decrease in 1995 gas costs of $20 million
was predominantly due to lower gas prices in 1995, compared to 1994.
Other Operating Expenses. Other operating expense variations in 1995 through 1997 reflected
recurring factors such as growth, inflation, labor and benefit increases. In 1997, other operations
expenses increased $41 million primarily due to increases in information system-related costs, labor
and injuries and damages expenses. In 1996, other operations expenses increased $2 million primari-
ly due to increases in employee benefits, injuries and damages and information system-related costs,
offset by decreases resulting from several nonrecurring costs incurred in 1995. Other operations
expenses increased $7 million in 1995, mainly due to increases in labor and material and supplies
expenses, as well as the occurrence of several nonrecurring costs, including costs related to a volun-
tary separation program and write-offs of system development costs. These increases were partly off-
set by decreases in employee benefits, injuries and damages and insurance expenses.
Ameren
Maintenance expenses for 1997 increased $8 million primarily resulting from increased scheduled fos-
sil plant maintenance, partly offset by decreased expenses at Callaway Plant due to the absence of a
refueling outage in 1997. In 1996, maintenance expenses decreased $5 million primarily due to lower
scheduled power plant maintenance, partly offset by increased labor expenses at Callaway Plant. In
1995, maintenance expenses increased $26 million mainly due to scheduled power plant maintenance
expenses, partially offset by reduced distribution system maintenance expenses. Callaway Plant's main-
tenance expenses increased $17 million primarily due to the spring 1995 refueling outage. Maintenance
expenses at other power plants increased primarily due to scheduled maintenance outages.
Depreciation and amortization expense increased $7 million in 1997, $12 million in 1996 and $11
million in 1995, due to increased depreciable property.
Taxes. Income tax expense from operations decreased $19 million in 1997 principally due to lower
pretax income and a lower effective tax rate. Income tax expense from operations decreased $8 million
in 1996 principally due to lower pretax income. Income tax expense from operations decreased $2 mil-
lion in 1995 primarily due to lower pretax income, partially offset by a higher effective income tax rate.
19LIQUIDITY AND
CAPITAL
RESOURCES
20
Other Income and Deductions. Miscellaneous, net increased $11 million for 1997, compared to 1996,
primarily due to the capitalization of merger-related expenses. (See Note 2 - Regulatory Matters under
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.) Miscellaneous, net increased $2 mil-
lion for 1996 primarily due to reduced merger-related expenses. Miscellaneous, net decreased $11 mil-
lion for 1995 primarily due to increased merger-related expenses.
Interest. Interest expense increased $5 million in 1997 primarily due to higher debt outstanding during
the year at higher interest rates. Interest expense increased $2 million for 1996 primarily due to a greater
amount of short-term debt outstanding, offset by lower rates on variable-rate long-term debt. In 1995,
interest expense declined $5 million as decreases in other interest expense were partly offset by higher
interest rates on variable long-term debt.
Balance Sheet. The $26 million decrease in other current liabilities was primarily due to a lower accrued
customer credit. (See Note 2 - Regulatory Matters under Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for
further information.) The $50 million increase in other deferred credits and liabilities was attributable to
increases in the accrued pension liability and the nuclear decommissioning trust fund.
Cash provided by operating activities totaled $687 million for 1997, compared to $786 million and $792
million 1996 and 1995, respectively.
Cash flows used in investing activities totaled $387 million, $481 million and $468 million, for the
years ended December 31, 1997, 1996 and 1995, respectively. Expenditures in 1997 for constructing
new or to improve existing facilities, purchasing rail cars and complying with the Clean Air Act were
$381 million. In addition, the Company spent $35 million to acquire nuclear fuel.
Construction expenditures are expected to be about $315 million in 1998. For the five-year period
1998-2002, construction expenditures are estimated at $1.7 billion. This estimate does not include any
construction expenditures which may be incurred by the Company to meet new air quality standards
for ozone and particulate matter, as discussed below.
The Company's need for additional base load electric generating capacity is not anticipated until
after the year 2013. Under Title IV of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990, the Company is required
to significantly reduce total annual sulfur dioxide emissions by the year 2000. Significant reductions in
nitrogen oxide are also required. By switching to low-sulfur coal and early banking of emissions credits,
the Company anticipates that it can comply with the requirements of the law without significant rev-
enue increases because the related capital costs are largely offset by lower fuel costs. As of year-end
1997, estimated remaining capital costs expected to be incurred pertaining to Clean Air Act-related
projects totaled $107 million.
In July 1997, the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) issued final regulations revis-
ing the National Ambient Air Quality Standards for ozone and particulate matter. Although specific
emission control requirements are still being developed, it is believed that the revised standards will
require significant additional reductions in nitrogen oxide and sulfur dioxide emissions from coal-fired
boilers. In October 1997, the EPA announced that Missouri and Illinois are included in the area targeted
for nitrogen oxide emissions reductions as part of the EPA's regional control program. Reduction
requirements in nitrogen oxide emissions from the Company's coal-fired boilers could exceed 80% from
1990 levels by the year 2002. Reduction requirements in sulfur dioxide emissions may be up to 50%
beyond that already required by Phase il acid rain control provisions of the 1990 Clean Air Act
Amendments and could be required by 2007. Because of the magnitude of these additional reductions,
the Company could be required to incur significantly higher capital costs to meet future compliance
obligations for its coal-fired boilers or purchase power from other sources, either of which could have
significantly higher operations and maintenance expenditures associated with compliance. At this time,
the Company is unable to determine the impact of the revised air quality standards on its future finan-
cial condition, results of operations or liquidity.
In December 1997, the United States and numerous other countries agreed to certain environmental
provisions (the Kyoto Protocol), which would require decreases in greenhouse gases in an effort to
address the "global warming" issue. The Company is unable to predict what requirements, if any, will
be adopted in this country. However, implementation of the Kyoto Protocol in its present form would
likely result in significantly higher capital costs and operations and maintenance expenditures by the
Company. At this time, the Company is unable to determine the impact of these proposals on its future
financial condition, results of operations or liquidity.
See Note 11 Callaway Nuclear Plant under Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a dis-
cussion of Callaway Plant decommissioning costs.
Cash flows used in financing activities were $302 million for 1997, compared to $296 million and
$325 million for 1996 and 1995, respectively. The Company's principal financing activities during 1997
included the issuance of $187 million of long-term debt, offset by the redemption of $123 million of
long-term debt and $64 million of preferred stock and the payment of dividends.
The Company plans to continue utilizing short-term debt to support normal operations and other tem-RATE MATTERS
CONTINGENCIES
DIVIDENDS
ELECTRIC
INDUSTRY
RESTRUCTURING
porary requirements. The Company's utility operating subsidiaries are authorized by the FERC to have up
to an aggregate $750 million of short-term unsecured debt instruments outstanding at any one time.
Short-term borrowings consist of bank loans (maturities generally on an overnight basis) and commercial
paper (maturities generally within 10 to 45 days). At December 31, 1997, the Company had committed
bank lines of credit aggregating $259 million (of which $244 million were unused and $179 million were
available at such date) which make available interim financing at various rates of interest based on LIBOR,
the bank certificate of deposit rate or other options. The lines of credit are renewable annually at various
dates throughout the year. At year-end, the Company had $86 million of short-term borrowings.
AmerenUE also has bank credit agreements due 1999 which permit the borrowing of up to $300
million and $200 million on a long-term basis. At December 31, 1997, $35 million of such borrowings
were outstanding.
Additionally, Ameren UE has a lease agreement which provides for the financing of nuclear fuel. At
December 31, 1997, the maximum amount that could be financed under the agreement was $120 mil-
lion. Cash provided from financing for 1997 included issuances under the lease for nuclear fuel of $40
million, offset in part by $28 million of redemptions. At December 31, 1997, $117 million was financed
under the lease. (See Note 3 - Nuclear Fuel Lease under Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for
further information.)
See Note 2 - Regulatory Matters under Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of rate
matters.
See Note 10- Commitments and Contingencies under Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for
material issues existing at December 31, 1997.
Common stock dividends paid in 1997 resulted in a payout rate of 99% of the Company's earnings to
common stockholders (86% of earnings before extraordinary charge). Dividends paid to common stock-
holders in relation to net cash provided by operating activities for the same period were 48%.
The Board of Directors does not set specific targets or payout parameters for dividend payments;
however, the Board considers various issues including the Company's historic earnings and cash flow;
projected earnings, cash flow and potential cash flow requirements; dividend payout rates at other utili-
ties; return on investments with similar risk characteristics; and overall business considerations. On
February 13, 1998, the Ameren Board of Directors declared a quarterly common stock dividend of 63.5
cents per share, payable March 31, 1998.
Changes enacted and being considered at the federal and state levels continue to change the structure
of the electric industry and utility regulation, as well as encourage increased competition. At the federal
level, the Energy Policy Act of 1992 reduced various restrictions on the operation and ownership of inde-
pendent power producers and gave the FERC the authority to order electric utilities to provide transmis-
sion access to third parties.
In April 1996, the FERC issued Order 888 and Order 889, which are intended to promote compe-
tition in the wholesale electric market. The FERC requires transmission-owning public utilities, such as
AmerenUE and AmerenCIPS, to provide transmission access and service to others in a manner similar
and comparable to that which the utilities have by virtue of ownership. Order 888 requires that a sin-
gle tariff be used by the utility in providing transmission service. Order 888 also provides for the
recovery of stranded costs, under certain conditions, related to the wholesale business.
Order 889 established the standards of conduct and information requirements that transmission
owners must adhere to in doing business under the open access rule. Under Order 889, utilities must
obtain transmission service for their own use in the same manner their customers will obtain service,
thus mitigating market power through control of transmission facilities. In addition, under Order 889,
utilities must separate their merchant function (buying and selling wholesale power) from their trans-
mission and reliability functions.
The Company believes that Order 888 and Order 889, which relate to its wholesale business, will
not have a material adverse effect on its financial condition, results of operations or liquidity.
In addition, certain states are considering proposals or have adopted legislation that will promote
competition at the retail level. In December 1997, the Governor of Illinois signed the Electric Service
Customer Choice and Rate Relief Law of 1997 (the Act) providing for electric utility restructuring in
Illinois. This legislation introduces competition into the supply of electric energy in Illinois. (See Note 2-
Regulatory Matters under Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.)
After evaluating the impact of this legislation, the Company determined that it was necessary to
write-off the generation-related regulatory assets and liabilities of its Illinois retail electric business.
This extraordinary charge reduced 1997 earnings $52 million, net of income taxes, or 38 cents per
share. The Company has also concluded that its remaining net generation-related assets are not
impaired and that no plant write-downs are necessary at this time. The provisions of the Act could
Ameren
2122
INFORMATION
SYSTEMS
OUTLOOK
also result in lower revenues, reduced profit margins and increased costs of capital. At this time, the
Company is unable to determine any further impact of the Act on its future financial condition,
results of operations or liquidity. (See Note 2 - Regulatory Matters under Notes to Consolidated
Financial Statements for further information.)
In Missouri, where approximately 72% of the Company's retail electric revenues are derived, a task
force appointed by the Missouri Public Service Commission (MoPSC) is investigating electric industry
restructuring and competition and is expected to issue a report to the MOPSC in 1998. A joint legisla-
tive committee is also conducting hearings on these issues. Up to this point, retail wheeling has not
been allowed in Missouri; however, the joint agreement approved by the MOPSC in February 1997 as
part of its merger authorization includes a provision that required AmerenUE to file a proposal for a
100-megawatt experimental retail wheeling pilot program in Missouri. Ameren UE filed its proposal
with the MOPSC in September 1997. This proposal is subject to review and approval by the MOPSC.
The Company is unable to predict the timing or ultimate outcome of electric industry restructuring in
the state of Missouri, as well as its impact the Company's future financial condition, results of opera-
tions or liquidity. The potential negative consequences of electric industry restructuring could be signifi-
cant and include the impairment and write-down of certain assets, including generation-related plant
and net regulatory assets, lower revenues, reduced profit margins and increased costs of capital. (See
Note 2 - Regulatory Matters under Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.)
The Year 2000 issue relates to computer systems and applications that currently use two-digit date
fields to designate a year. As the century date change occurs, date-sensitive systems will recognize the
year 2000 as 1900, or not at all. This inability to recognize or properly treat the year 2000 may cause
systems to process critical financial and operational information incorrectly.
The Company is utilizing both internal and external resources to identify, correct or reprogram and
test information systems for Year 2000 compliance. The Company estimates that its costs for
addressing the Year 2000 issue will range from $10 million to $15 million. These costs will be
expensed as incurred.
Significant changes are taking place in the electric utility industry. The Company's management and
Board of Directors recognize that competition will likely continue to increase in the future, especially
in the energy supply portion of the business. New air quality standards are being considered which
could significantly increase capital costs, purchased power expenses and other operations and main-
tenance expenditures. In addition, expenditures for information systems are increasing (including
those costs associated with the Year 2000 issue). These issues will result in numerous challenges and
uncertainties for Ameren and the utility industry, including the potential for increased earnings pres-
sure on Ameren and other electric utilities. Due to the factors cited above, as well as expected future
rate decreases in the Company's Illinois and Missouri jurisdictions (see Note 2 - Regulatory Matters
under Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information) and other operating con-
ditions (such as the refueling of Callaway Nuclear Plant), management believes that 1998 earnings
will likely be lower than 1997 earnings, excluding the extraordinary charge for the write-off of the
generation-related regulatory assets and liabilities associated with the Company's Illinois retail electric
business. In addition, the factors cited previously may also contribute to earnings pressure beyond
1998. At this time, management cannot predict the ultimate timing or impact of these matters on its
future financial condition, results of operations or liquidity.
Ameren management and its Board of Directors are taking actions to address these challenges.
Efforts are underway to accelerate merger cost savings and other expense reductions. The Company
is also analyzing the potential benefits associated with the Illinois electric industry restructuring legis-
lation, including the elimination of the fuel adjustment clause and the securitization of certain future
revenues. In addition, the Company will continue to focus on developing its core energy business for
additional growth opportunities, as evidenced by the recent formation of a power marketing and
energy services affiliate, Ameren Energy, Inc. Through these initiatives and other strategies, the
Company intends to address these challenges, maximize the value of its strategic generating assets
and enhance shareholder value.
ACCOUNTING In June 1997, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued Statement of Financial Accounting
MATTERS Standards (SFAS) No. 130, "Reporting Comprehensive Income" and SFAS No. 131, "Disclosures
about Segments of an Enterprise and Related Information." SFAS 130 establishes standards for report-
ing and displaying comprehensive income. SFAS 131 establishes standards for reporting information
about operating segments in annual financial statements and interim reports to shareholders. SFAS
130 and SFAS 131 are effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 1997. SFAS 130 and
SFAS 131 are not expected to have a material effect on the Company's financial position or results of
operations upon adoption.EFFECTS OF
INFLATION AND
CHANGING PRICES
SAFE HARBOR
STATEMENT
The Company's rates for retail electric and gas service are regulated by the MOPSC and the Illinois
Commerce Commission. Non-retail electric rates are regulated by the FERC.
The current replacement cost of the Company's utility plant substantially exceeds its recorded histori-
cal cost. Under existing regulatory practice, only the historical cost of plant is recoverable from cus-
tomers. As a result, cash flows designed to provide recovery of historical costs through depreciation
may not be adequate to replace plant in future years. However, existing regulatory practice may be
modified for the Company's generation portion of its business (see Note 2 - Regulatory Matters under
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information). In addition, the impact on com-
mon stockholders is mitigated to the extent depreciable property is financed with debt that is repaid
with dollars of less purchasing power.
In Illinois, changes in the cost of fuel for electric generation and gas costs are generally reflected in
billings to customers through fuel and purchased gas adjustment clauses. However, existing regulatory
practice may be modified in the Illinois retail jurisdiction for changes in the cost of fuel for electric gen-
eration (see Note 2 - Regulatory Matters under Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further
information). In the Missouri retail jurisdiction, the cost of fuel for electric generation is reflected in base
rates with no provision for changes to be made through a fuel adjustment clause. Changes in gas costs
in the Missouri retail jurisdiction are generally reflected in billings to customers through a purchased gas
adjustment clause.
Inflation continues to be a factor affecting operations, earnings, stockholders' equity and financial
performance.
Statements made in this annual report to stockholders which are not based on historical facts, are
forward-looking and, accordingly, involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ
materially from those discussed. Although such forward-looking statements have been made in good
faith and are based on reasonable assumptions, there is no assurance that the expected results will be
achieved. These statements include (without limitation) statements as to future expectations, beliefs,
plans, strategies, objectives, events, conditions and financial performance. In connection with the "Safe
Harbor" provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, the Company is providing this
cautionary statement to identify important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from
those anticipated. Factors include, but are not limited to, the effects of regulatory actions; changes in
laws and other governmental actions; competition; future market prices for electricity; average rates for
electricity in the Midwest; business and economic conditions; weather conditions; fuel prices and availability;
generation plant performance; monetary and fiscal policies; and legal and administrative proceedings.
Ameren
23Consolidated Balance Sheet
Assets
(Thousands of Dollars)
December 31,
Property and Plant, at original cost:
Electric
Gas
Other
Less accumulated depreciation and amortization
Construction work progress:
Nuclear fuel in process
Other
Investments and Other Assets:
Total property and plant, net
24
Investments
Nuclear decommissioning trust fund
Other
Current Assets:
Total investments and other assets
Cash and cash equivalents
Accounts receivable - trade (less allowance for doubtful
accounts of $4,845 and $5,795, respectively)
Unbilled revenue
Other
Other accounts and notes receivable
Materials and supplies, at average cost --
Fossil fuel
Other
Total current assets
Regulatory Assets:
Deferred income taxes
Other
Total regulatory assets
TOTAL ASSETS
See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
1997
$11,522,730 $11,252,095
447,458
428,531
36,023
35,965
12,006,211 11,716,591
5,285,434 5,024,046
6,720,777
6,692,545
134,804
96,147
131,504
162,414
6,987,085 6,951,106
97,188
122,438
64,915
284,541
9,696
266,306
102,864
49,765
1996
93,431
134,152
55,002
711,216
639,792
204,913
844,705
$8,827,547
113,310
96,601
64,655
274,566
11,899
268,839
106,316
55,256
106,153
137,953
42,759
729,175
734,206
243,514
977,720
$8,932,567
i
"
:Consolidated Balance Sheet
Capital and Liabilities
(Thousands of Dollars)
December 31,
Capitalization:
Common stock, $.01 par value, authorized 400,000,000 shares -
outstanding 137,215,462 shares
Other paid-in capital, principally premium on common stock
Retained earnings (see accompanying statement)
Total common stockholders'
Preferred stock not subject to mandatory redemption (Note 4)
Preferred stock subject to mandatory redemption (Note 4)
Long-term debt (Note 6)
Total capitalization
Minority Interest in Consolidated Subsidiary
Current Liabilities:
Current maturity of long-term debt
Short-term debt
Accounts and wages payable
Accumulated deferred income taxes
Taxes accrued
Other
Total current liabilities
Construction, Commitments and Contingencies (Notes 10 and 11)
Accumulated Deferred Income Taxes
Accumulated Deferred Investment Tax Credits
Regulatory Liability
Other Deferred Credits and Liabilities
TOTAL CAPITAL AND LIABILITIES
See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
S
1997
1,372 $ 1,372
1,582,938 1,583,728
1,434,658 1,431,295
3,018,968 3,016,395
235,197 298,497
624
-
2,506,068 2,335,454
5,760,233
5,650,970
3,534
1996
52,241
86,266
293,391
35,809
110,566
168,727
747,000
3,534
146,410
69,068
297,017
43,933
65,245
194,239
815,912
1,556,981 1,653,095
190,260
209,227
224,225
304,172
345,314
295,657
Ameren
$8,827,547 $8,932,567
25
........... a serem mecum c….…………………▬
---------
HET ZAConsolidated Statement Of Income
(Thousands of Dollars, Except Shares and per Share Amounts)
Year ended December 31,
Operating Revenues:
Electric
Gas
Other
Total operating revenues
Operating Expenses:
Operations
Fuel and purchased power
Gas
Other
Maintenance
Depreciation and amortization
Income taxes
Other taxes
Total operating expenses
Operating Income
Other Income and (Deductions):
Allowance for equity funds used during construction
Miscellaneous, net
Total other income and (deductions)
Income Before Interest Charges and Preferred Dividends
Interest Charges and Preferred Dividends:
Interest
Allowance for borrowed funds used during construction
Preferred dividends of subsidiaries
Net interest charges and preferred dividends
26
Income Before Extraordinary Charge
Extraordinary Charge, net of income taxes (Note 2)
NET INCOME
Earnings per Common Share - Basic and Diluted
(based on average shares outstanding)
Income before extraordinary charge
Extraordinary charge
Net Income
AVERAGE COMMON SHARES OUTSTANDING
See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
1997
$3,064,177
249,815
12,551
3,326,543
836,445
160,679
585,214
880,204
160,776
543,998
1,582,338 1,584,978
310,241
302,203
346,000
339,276
234,179
271,711
582,074
823,951
125,305
542,386
1,491,642
307,546
327,201
253,005
260,940
273,034
270,670
2,744,469 2,752,496 2,657,999
5,244
(10,344)
(5,100)
576,974
185,368
(7,462)
12,532
190,438
386,536
(51,820)
$ 334,716
1996
$2.82
$3,061,856
254,412
12,153
3,328,421
(.38)
575,925
6,870
(21,229)
(14,359)
561,566
180,402
(7,490)
16,970
189,882
371,684
$ 371,684
1995
$2.71
$3,008,481
217,420
9,976
3,235,877
577,878
7,716
(22,975)
(15,259)
562,619
178,826
(6,179)
17,100
189,747
372,872
$ 372,872
$2.72
$2.44
$2.71
$2.72
137,215,462 137,215,462 137,215,462Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
(Thousands of Dollars)
Year ended December 31,
Cash Flows From Operating:
Income before extraordinary charge
Adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by
operating activities:
Depreciation and amortization
Amortization of nuclear fuel
Allowance for funds used during construction
Postretirement benefit accrual
Deferred income taxes, net
Deferred investment tax credits, net
Changes in assets and liabilities:
Receivables, net
Materials and supplies
Accounts and wages payable
Taxes accrued
Other
Net cash provided by operating activities
Cash Flows From Investing:
Construction expenditures
Allowance for funds used during construction
Nuclear fuel expenditures
Other
Net cash used in investing activities
Cash Flows From Financing:
Dividends on common stock
Environmental bond funds
Redemptions -
Nuclear fuel lease
Short-term debt
Long-term debt
Preferred stock
Issuances -
Nuclear fuel lease
Short-term debt
Long-term debt
Net cash used in financing activities
Net change in cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year
CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS AT End of Year
Cash paid during the periods:
Interest (net of amount capitalized)
Income taxes
1997
$386,536
(24,499)
(18,967)
340,079
333,565
37,126
37,792
(12,706) (14,360)
11,476
16,523
(3,626)
45,321
(89,862)
687,401
(28,292)
(123,444)
(63,924)
1996
(380,593)
(435,904)
12,706
14,360
(35,432)
(51,176)
16,122
(7,784)
(387,197) (480,504)
(2,203)
$371,684 $372,872
11,899
$ 9,696
12,665
(9,531)
$162,459
$242,222
(25,468)
2,376
7,302
6,259
63,816
786,100
40,337
43,884
17,198
9,847
187,000
65,194
(302,407) (296,075)
(34,819)
(18,300)
(35,000)
(26)
(331,282) (326,855) (319,875)
4,443
1995
9,521
2,378
$11,899
322,813
35,140
(13,895)
11,923
4,003
(9,542)
(21,229)
(174)
105,042
(7,085)
(8,212)
791,656
(429,839)
13,895
(42,444)
(10,047)
(468,435)
(70,420)
(6,100)
(54,000)
(26)
49,134
52,536
19,766
(324,542)
(1,321)
3,699
$ 2,378
$167,433 $173,569
$248,096 $274,820
SUPPLEMENTAL DISCLOSURE OF NONCASH TRANSACTION:
An extraordinary charge to earnings was recorded in the fourth quarter of 1997 for the write-off of generation-related regulatory assets and liabilities of the Company's
Blinois retail electric business as a result of electric industry restructuring legislation enacted in Illinois in December 1997. The write-off reduced earnings $52 million, net
of income taxes. (See Note 2 - Regulatory Matters for further information.)
See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
7 Ameren
27Consolidated Statement Of Retained Earnings
(Thousands of Dollars)
Year ended December 31,
Balance at Beginning of Period
Add:
Net income
Other
Deduct:
Common stock cash dividends
Other
BALANCE AT CLOSE OF PERIOD
Selected Quarterly Information
(Unaudited)
(Thousands of Dollars, Except per Share Amounts)
Quarter Ended
March 31, 1997 (a)
March 31, 1996 (a)
June 30, 1997 (b)
June 30, 1996 (b)
September 30, 1997
September 30, 1996
December 31, 1997 (c)
December 31, 1996 (c)
Operating
Revenues
$ 759,663
777,333
791,821
785,297
1,043,137
1,018,214
731,922
747,577
28
1997
1996
1995
$1,431,295 $1,385,629 $1,331,567
334,716
334,716
331,282
71
331,353
371,684
837
372,521
$ 95,461
106,393
132,492
326,855
123,668
269,093
267,812
85,028
78,052
326,855
$1,434,658 $1,431,295 $1,385,629
Operating Net Income Earnings (Loss)
Income
(Loss) per Common
Share
$ 44,977
57,946
79,686
72,616
215,423
217,073
372,872
1,065
373,937
(5,370)
24,049
319,875
319,875
Other changes in quarterly earnings are due to the effect of weather on sales and other factors that are characteristic of public utility operations.
See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
(a) The first quarter of 1997 and 1996 included credits to Missouri electric customers which reduced net income approximately $7 million, or 5 cents per share, and $8
million, or 6 cents per share, respectively. In addition, a 1.8% rate decrease effective August 1995 for Missouri electric customers reduced net income for the first
quarter of 1996 $4 million, or 3 cents per share.
$.33
.42
.58
.53
1.57
1.58
(.04)
.18
(b) The second quarter of 1997 and 1996 included credits to Missouri electric customers which reduced net income approximately $4 million, or 3 cents per share, and
$18 million, or 14 cents per share, respectively. In addition, the 1995 rate decrease reduced net income for the second quarter of 1996 $5 million, or 4 cents per share.
(c) The fourth quarter of 1997 included a net reversal of merger-related expenses of $17 million, or 13 cents per share. The fourth quarter of 1997 also included an
extraordinary charge of $52 million, net of income taxes, or 38 cents per share (see Note 2 - Regulatory Matters for further information). Callaway Plant refueling
expenses, which decreased net income approximately $18 million, or 13 cents per share, were included in the fourth quarter of 1996.Notes To Consolidated Financial Statements
NOTE 1 Merger and Basis of Presentation. Effective December 31, 1997, following the receipt of all required
Summary of state and federal regulatory approvals, Union Electric Company (Ameren UE) and CIPSCO Incorporated
Significant (CIPSCO) combined to form Ameren Corporation (Ameren) (the Merger). The accompanying consolidated
Accounting financial statements (the financial statements) reflect the accounting for the Merger as a pooling of
Policies interests and are presented as if the companies were combined as of the earliest period presented.
However, the financial information is not necessarily indicative of the results of operations, financial
position or cash flows that would have occurred had the Merger been consummated for the periods for
which it is given effect, nor is it necessarily indicative of future results of operations, financial position or
cash flows. The outstanding preferred stock of Ameren UE and Central Illinois Public Service Company
(AmerenCIPS), a subsidiary of CIPSCO, was not affected by the Merger.
The accompanying financial statements include the accounts of Ameren and its consolidated sub-
sidiaries (collectively the Company). All subsidiaries for which the Company owns directly or indirectly more
than 50% of the voting stock are included as consolidated subsidiaries. Ameren's primary operating com-
panies, AmerenUE and AmerenCIPS, are engaged principally in the generation, transmission, distribution
and sale of electric energy and the purchase, distribution, transportation and sale of natural gas in the
states of Missouri and Illinois. The Company also has a non-regulated investing subsidiary, CIPSCO
Investment Company (CIC). Additionally, the Company has a 60% interest in Electric Energy, Inc. (EEI). EEI
owns and operates an electric generating and transmission facility in Illinois that supplies electric power pri-
marily to a uranium enrichment plant located in Paducah, Kentucky.
All significant intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated from the consolidated
financial statements.
Operating revenues and net income for each of the years in the three year period ended December 31,
1997, were as follows (in millions):
Year ended December 31, 1997:
Operating revenues
Extraordinary charge
Net income
Year ended December 31, 1996:
Operating revenues
Net income
Year ended December 31, 1995:
Operating revenues
Net income
AmerenUE
$2,287
(27)
293
$2,260
292
$2,242
301
CIPSCO
$863
(25)
42
$891
80
$837
72
Other
$177
$177
Ameren
$3,327
(52)
335
$3,328
372
$157 $3,236
373
Regulation. Ameren is a registered holding company under the Public Utility Holding Company Act
of 1935 (PUHCA) and is subject to regulation by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).
AmerenUE is also regulated by the Missouri Public Service Commission (MOPSC), Illinois Commerce
Commission (ICC) and the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC). AmerenCIPS is also regulated
by the ICC and the FERC. The accounting policies of the Company conform to generally accepted
accounting principles (GAAP). (See Note 2 - Regulatory Matters for further information.)
Property and Plant. The cost of additions to and betterments of units of property and plant is capital-
ized. Cost includes labor, material, applicable taxes and overheads, plus an allowance for funds used
during construction. Maintenance expenditures and the renewal of items not considered units of prop-
erty are charged to income as incurred. When units of depreciable property are retired, the original cost
and removal cost, less salvage, are charged to accumulated depreciation.
Depreciation. Depreciation is provided over the estimated lives of the various classes of depreciable
property by applying composite rates on a straight-line basis. The provision for depreciation in 1997,
1996 and 1995 was approximately 3% of the average depreciable cost.
Fuel and Gas Costs. In Illinois, changes in the cost of fuel for electric generation and gas costs are gen-
erally reflected in billings to customers through fuel and purchased gas adjustment clauses. However,
existing regulatory practice may be modified in the Illinois retail jurisdiction for changes in the cost of fuel
for electric generation (see Note 2- Regulatory Matters for further information). In the Missouri retail juris-
diction, the cost of fuel for electric generation is reflected in base rates with no provision for changes to
be made through a fuel adjustment clause. Changes in gas costs in the Missouri retail jurisdiction are gen-
erally reflected in billings to customers through a purchased gas adjustment clause.
Ameran
Nuclear Fuel. The cost of nuclear fuel is amortized to fuel expense on a unit-of-production basis. Spent
fuel disposal cost is charged to expense based on kilowatthours sold.
29
WANTIN
an ay mapapa
PET S ha den m30
NOTE 2 -
Regulatory
Matters
Cash and Cash Equivalents. Cash and cash equivalents include cash on hand and temporary invest-
ments purchased with a maturity of three months or less.
Income Taxes. The Company and its subsidiaries file a consolidated federal tax return. Deferred tax
assets and liabilities are recognized for the tax consequences of transactions that have been treated differ-
ently for financial reporting and tax return purposes, measured using statutory tax rates.
Investment tax credits utilized in prior years were deferred and are being amortized over the useful
lives of the related properties.
Allowance for Funds Used During Construction. Allowance for funds used during construction (AFC)
is a utility industry accounting practice whereby the cost of borrowed funds and the cost of equity funds
(preferred and common stockholders' equity) applicable to the Company's construction program are capi-
talized as a cost of construction. AFC does not represent a current source of cash funds. This accounting
practice offsets the effect on earnings of the cost of financing current construction, and treats such
financing costs in the same manner as construction charges for labor and materials.
Under accepted rate-making practice, cash recovery of AFC, as well as other construction costs, occurs
when completed projects are placed in service and reflected in customer rates. The AFC ranges of rates
used during 1997, 1996 and 1995 were 8.3% - 8.7%, 7.7% -9.0% and 9.0% -9.3%, respectively.
Unamortized Debt Discount, Premium and Expense. Discount, premium and expense associated
with long-term debt are amortized over the lives of the related issues.
Revenue. The Company accrues an estimate of electric and gas revenues for service rendered but
unbilled at the end of each accounting period.
Stock Compensation Plans. The Company applies Accounting Principles Board Opinion No. 25,
"Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees" (APB 25) in accounting for its plans.
Long-Lived Assets. Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) No. 121, "Accounting for the
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets and for Long-Lived Assets to be Disposed Of" became effective on
January 1, 1996. SFAS 121 prescribes general standards for the recognition and measurement of impair-
ment losses. SFAS 121 requires that regulatory assets which are no longer probable of recovery through
future revenues be charged to earnings (see Note 2 - Regulatory Matters for further information).
Earnings per Share. SFAS No. 128, "Earnings per Share" became effective on January 1, 1997. SFAS
128 established standards for computing and presenting earnings per share (EPS) on a basic and diluted
basis (see Note 9 - Stock Options for further information). SFAS 128 did not have an impact on the finan-
cial position, results of operations or liquidity of the Company upon adoption.
Use of Estimates. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires manage-
ment to make certain estimates and assumptions. Such estimates and assumptions may affect reported
amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the finan-
cial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reported period. Actual
results could differ from those estimates.
Reclassifications. Certain reclassifications have been made to prior-years financial statements to con-
form with 1997 reporting.
In July 1995, the MOPSC approved an agreement involving the Company's Missouri retail electric rates.
The agreement decreased rates 1.8% for all classes of Missouri retail electric customers, effective
August 1, 1995, reducing annual revenues about $30 million and reducing annual earnings approximately
13 cents per share. In addition, a one-time $30 million credit to retail Missouri electric customers reduced
1995 earnings approximately 13 cents per share. Also included was a three-year experimental alternative
regulation plan that runs from July 1,1995 through June 30, 1998, which provides that earnings in any
future years in excess of a 12.61% regulatory return on equity (ROE) will be shared equally between cus-
tomers and stockholders, and earnings above a 14% ROE will be credited to customers. The formula for
computing the credit uses twelve-month results ending June 30, rather than calendar year earnings. The
agreement also provides that no party shall file for a general increase or decrease in the Company's Missouri
retail electric rates prior to July 1, 1998, except that the Company may file for an increase if certain adverse
events occur. During 1997, the Company recorded a $20 million credit for the second year of the plan,
which reduced earnings $11 million, or 8 cents per share. During 1996, the Company recorded a $47 mil-
lion credit, which reduced earnings $28 million, or 20 cents per share. These credits were reflected as reduc-
tions in electric revenues.
Included in the joint agreement approved by the MOPSC in its February 1997 order authorizing the
Merger, is a new three-year experimental alternative regulation plan that will run from July 1, 1998 through
June 30, 2001. Like the current plan, the new plan requires that earnings over a 12.61% ROE up to a 14%
ROE will be shared equally between customers and stockholders. The new three-year plan will also return to
customers 90% of all earnings above a 14% ROE up to a 16% ROE. Earnings above a 16% ROE would be
credited entirely to customers. Other agreement provisions include: recovery within a 10-year period of the
merger-related expenses applicable to the Missouri retail jurisdiction; a Missouri electric rate decrease, effec-
tive September 1, 1998, based on the weather-adjusted average annual credits to customers under the
current experimental alternative regulation plan; and an experimental retail wheeling pilot program for 100
——————- — -.▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬ ▬▬▬▬-megawatts of electric power. Also, as part of the agreement, the Company did not seek to recover in Missouri
the merger premium. The exclusion of the merger premium from rates did not result in a charge to earnings.
In September 1997, the ICC approved the Merger subject to certain conditions. The conditions
included the requirement for Ameren UE and AmerenCIPS to file electric and gas rate cases or alterna-
tive regulatory plans within six months after the Merger became final to determine how net merger
savings would be shared between the ratepayers and stockholders.
In December 1997, the Governor of Illinois signed the Electric Service Customer Choice and Rate
Relief Law of 1997 (the Act) providing for electric utility restructuring in Illinois. This legislation intro-
duces competition into the supply of electric energy in Illinois. The Act includes a 5% rate decrease for
the Company's Illinois residential electric customers, effective August 1, 1998. The Company may be
subject to additional 5% residential electric rate decreases in each of 2000 and 2002 to the extent its
rates exceed the Midwest utility average at that time. The Company's rates are currently below the
Midwest utility average. The Company estimates that the initial 5% rate decrease will result in a
decrease in annual electric revenues of about $13 million, based on estimated levels of sales and
assuming normal weather conditions. Retail direct access, which allows customers to choose their elec-
tric generation supplier, will be phased in over several years. Access for commercial and industrial
customers will occur over a period from October 1999 to December 2000, and access for residential
customers will occur after May 1, 2002. The Act also relieves the Company of the requirement in the
ICC's September 1997 Order (which approved the Merger), requiring Ameren UE and AmerenCIPS to
file electric rate cases or alternative regulatory plans in Illinois following consummation of the Merger to
reflect the effects of net merger savings. Other provisions of the Act include (1) potential recovery of a
portion of stranded costs through a transition charge collected from customers who choose another
electric supplier, (2) the option to eliminate the uniform fuel adjustment clause (FAC) and to roll into
base rates a historical level of fuel expense and (3) a mechanism to securitize certain future revenues.
The Company's accounting policies and financial statements conform to GAAP applicable to rate-
regulated enterprises and reflect the effects of the ratemaking process in accordance with SFAS No. 71,
"Accounting for the Effects of Certain Types of Regulation." Such effects concern mainly the time at
which various items enter into the determination of net income in order to follow the principle of
matching costs and revenues. For example, SFAS 71 allows the Company to record certain assets and
liabilities (regulatory assets and regulatory liabilities) which are expected to be recovered or settled in
future rates and would not be recorded under GAAP for nonregulated entities. In addition, reporting
under SFAS 71 allows companies whose service obligations and prices are regulated to maintain assets
on their balance sheets representing costs they reasonably expect to recover from customers, through
inclusion of such costs in future rates. SFAS 101, "Accounting for the Discontinuance of Application of
FASB Statement No. 71," specifies how an enterprise that ceases to meet the criteria for application of
SFAS 71 for all or part of its operations should report that event in its financial statements. In general,
SFAS 101 requires that the enterprise report the discontinuance of SFAS 71 by eliminating from its bal-
ance sheet all regulatory assets and liabilities related to the portion of the business which no longer
meets the SFAS 71 criteria. At its July 24, 1997 meeting, the Emerging Issues Task Force of the Financial
Accounting Standards Board (EITF) concluded that application of SFAS 71 accounting should be discon-
tinued once sufficiently detailed deregulation legislation is issued for a separable portion of a business
for which a plan of deregulation has been established. However, the EITF further concluded that regula-
tory assets associated with the deregulated portion of the business, which will be recovered through
tariffs charged to customers of a regulated portion of the business, should be associated with the regu-
lated portion of the business from which future cash recovery is expected (not the portion of the busi-
ness from which the costs originated), and can therefore continue to be carried on the regulated enti-
ty's balance sheet to the extent such assets are recovered. In addition, SFAS 121 establishes accounting
standards for the impairment of long-lived assets (see Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting
Policies for further information).
Due to the enactment of the Act, prices for the retail supply of electric generation are expected to
transition from cost-based, regulated rates to rates determined in large part by competitive market
forces in the state of Illinois. As a result, the Company discontinued application of SFAS 71 for the
Illinois retail portion of its generating business (i.e., the portion of the Company's business related to the
supply of electric energy in Illinois) in the fourth quarter of 1997. The Company has evaluated the
impact of the Act on the future recoverability of its regulatory assets and liabilities related to the gener-
ation portion of its business and has determined that it is not probable that such assets and liabilities
will be recovered through the cash flows from the regulated portion of its business. Accordingly, the
Company's generation-related regulatory assets and liabilities of its Illinois retail electric business were
written off in the fourth quarter of 1997, resulting in an extraordinary charge to earnings of $52 mil-
lion, net of income taxes, or 38 cents per share. These regulatory assets and liabilities included previous-
ly incurred costs originally expected to be collected/refunded in future revenues, such as fuel contract
restructuring costs, deferred charges related to a generating plant, costs associated with an abandoned
scrubber at a fossil plant, and income tax-related regulatory assets and liabilities. In addition, the
Company has evaluated whether the recoverability of the costs associated with its remaining net gener-
ation-related assets have been impaired as defined under SFAS 121. The Company has concluded that
impairment, as defined under SFAS 121, does not exist and that no plant write-downs are necessary at
71 Ameren
31
I32
this time. At December 31, 1997, the Company's net investment in generation facilities related to its
Illinois retail jurisdiction approximated $836 million and was included in electric plant in-service on the
Company's consolidated balance sheet.
The provisions of the Act could also result in lower revenues, reduced profit margins and increased
costs of capital. At this time, the Company is unable to determine the impact of the Act on its future
financial condition, results of operations or liquidity.
In Missouri, where approximately 72% of the Company's retail electric revenues are derived, a task
force appointed by the MOPSC is conducting studies of electric industry restructuring and competition
and is expected to issue a report to the MOPSC in 1998. A joint legislative committee is also conducting
studies and is expected to report its findings and recommendations to the Missouri General Assembly.
Up to this point, retail wheeling has not been allowed in Missouri; however, the joint agreement
approved by the MOPSC in February 1997 as part of its merger authorization includes a provision that
required AmerenUE to file a proposal for a 100-megawatt experimental retail wheeling pilot program in
Missouri. AmerenUE filed its proposal with the MoPSC in September 1997. This proposal is subject to
review and approval by the MoPSC.
The Company is unable to predict the timing or ultimate outcome of electric industry restructuring
in the state of Missouri, as well as its impact on the Company's future financial condition, results of
operations or liquidity. The potential negative consequences of electric industry restructuring could be
significant and include the impairment and write-down of certain assets, including generation-related
plant and net regulatory assets, lower revenues, reduced profit margins and increased costs of capital.
At December 31, 1997, the Company's net investment in generation facilities related to its Missouri
jurisdiction approximated $2.7 billion and was included in electric plant in-service on the Company's
consolidated balance sheet. In addition, at December 31, 1997, the Company's Missouri net genera-
tion-related regulatory assets approximated $462 million.
In accordance with SFAS 71, the Company has deferred certain costs pursuant to actions of its regu-
lators, and is currently recovering such costs in electric rates charged to customers.
At December 31, the Company had recorded the following regulatory assets and regulatory liability:
1997
(in millions)
Regulatory Assets:
Income taxes
Callaway costs
Undepreciated plant costs
Unamortized loss on reacquired debt
DOE decommissioning assessment
Deferred environmental remediation costs
Merger costs
Other
Regulatory Assets
Regulatory Liability:
Income taxes
Regulatory Liability
$640
99
32
15
13
28
18
$845
$224
$224
1996
$734
111
41
42
18
11
21
$978
$304
$304
Income Taxes: See Note 7 - Income Taxes.
Callaway Costs: Represents Callaway Nuclear Plant operations and maintenance expenses, property
taxes and carrying costs incurred between the plant in-service date and the date the plant was reflected
in rates. These costs are being amortized over the remaining life of the plant (through 2024).
Undepreciated Plant Costs: Represents the unamortized cost of a generating plant's scrubber plus costs
of removal.
Unamortized Loss on Reacquired Debt: Represents losses related to refunded debt. These amounts are
being amortized over the lives of the related new debt issues or the remaining lives of the old debt issues
if no new debt was issued.
Department of Energy (DOE) Decommissioning Assessment: Represents fees assessed by the
DOE to decommission its uranium enrichment facility. These costs are being amortized through 2007
as payments are made to the DOE.
Deferred Environmental Remediation Costs: Represents costs, net of recoveries from insurers,
relating to studies and remediation at manufactured gas sites which are recovered through environ-
mental rate riders. (See Note 10 - Commitments and Contingencies for further information.)
Merger Costs: Represents the portion of merger-related expenses applicable to the Missouri retail
jurisdiction. These costs are being amortized within 10 years, based on a MOPSC order.
The Company continually assesses the recoverability of its regulatory assets. Under current
accounting standards, regulatory assets are written off to earnings when it is no longer probable thatNOTE 3 Nuclear
Fuel Lease
NOTE 4 - Preferred
Stock of
Subsidiaries
such amounts will be recovered through future revenues. However, as noted in the above paragraphs,
electric industry restructuring legislation may impact the recoverability of regulatory assets in the future.
In April 1996, the FERC issued Order 888 and Order 889 related to the industry's wholesale electric
business. In January 1998, the Company filed a combined open access tariff which conforms to the
FERC's orders.
The Company has a lease agreement which provides for the financing of nuclear fuel. At
December 31, 1997, the maximum amount that could be financed under the agreement was
$120 million. Pursuant to the terms of the lease, the Company has assigned to the lessor certain
contracts for purchase of nuclear fuel. The lessor obtains, through the issuance of commercial paper
or from direct loans under a committed revolving credit agreement from commercial banks, the nec-
essary funds to purchase the fuel and make interest payments when due.
The Company is obligated to reimburse the lessor for all expenditures for nuclear fuel, interest
and related costs. Obligations under this lease become due as the nuclear fuel is consumed at the
Company's Callaway Nuclear Plant. The Company reimbursed the lessor $31 million during 1997,
$37 million during 1996 and $34 million during 1995.
The Company has capitalized the cost, including certain interest costs, of the leased nuclear fuel
and has recorded the related lease obligation. During each of the years 1997, 1996 and 1995, the
total interest charges under the lease were $6 million (based on average interest rates of 5.8%,
5.7% and 6.1%, respectively) of which $3 million was capitalized in each respective year.
At December 31, 1997 and 1996, Ameren UE and AmerenCIPS had 25 million shares and 4.6 million shares,
respectively, of authorized preferred stock.
In 1997, AmerenUE redeemed $64 million of preferred stock (see note (b) in table below). Ameren UE
retired 260 shares, $6.30 Series preferred stock in 1995.
Outstanding preferred stock is redeemable at the redemption prices shown below (in millions):
1997
December 31,
Preferred Stock Not Subject to Mandatory Redemption
Preferred stock outstanding (entitled to cumulative dividends)
Without par value and stated value of $100 per share -
$7.64 Series - 330,000 shares
$7.44 Series
- 330,001 shares
$6.40 Series - 300,000 shares
$5.50 Series A - 14,000 shares
$4.75 Series - 20,000 shares
$4.56 Series - 200,000 shares
$4.50 Series
$4.30 Series
$4.00 Series
- 213,595 shares
- 40,000 shares
- 150,000 shares
$3.70 Series
- 40,000 shares
$3.50 Series - 130,000 shares
With par value of $100 per share -
4.00% Series 150,000 shares
-
4.25% Series - 50,000 shares
4.90% Series - 75,000 shares
Redemption Price (per share)
4.92% Series - 50,000 shares
5.16% Series - 50,000 shares
1993 Auction - 300,000 shares
6.625% Series - 125,000 shares
$103.82 note (a)
101.00 note (b)
101.50 note (b)
110.00
102.176
102.47
110.00 - note (c)
105.00
105.625
104.75
110.00
101.00
102.00
102.00
103.50
102.00
100.00 note (d)
100.00
note (e)
Without par value and stated value of $25 per share
$1.735 Series - 1,657,500 shares
Total Preferred Stock Not Subject to Mandatory Redemption
25.00 note (f)
-
Preferred Stock Subject to Mandatory Redemption
Preferred stock outstanding without par value (entitled to cumulative dividends)
Stated value of $100 per share
$6.30 Series - 0 and 6,240 shares
at respective dates
$100.00 note (b)
Total Preferred Stock Subject to Mandatory Redemption
(a) Beginning February 15, 2003, eventually declining to $100 per share.
(b) AmerenUE redeemed this series in 1997.
$ 33
1
$
20
21
4
15
4
13
TE BESON
15
5
8
5
5
30
12
42
$235
1996
Ameren
$33
MMOARTEA
$
$
33
30
1
2
20
21
4
15
4
13
FEBRECE
15
(c) In the event of voluntary liquidation, $105.50.
(d) Dividend rates, and the periods during which such rates apply, vary depending on the Company's selection of certain defined dividend period
lengths. The average dividend rate during 1997 was 3.98%.
(e) Not redeemable prior to October 1, 1998.
(f) Not redeemable prior to August 1, 1998.
5
30
12
42
$298
1
1
3334
NOTE 5 -
Short-Term
Borrowings
NOTE 6
Long-Term Debt
of Subsidiaries
Short-term borrowings of the Company consist of bank loans (maturities generally on an overnight
basis) and commercial paper (maturities generally within 10-45 days). At December 31, 1997 and 1996,
$86 million and $69 million, repectively, of short-term borrowings were outstanding. The weighted
average interest rates on borrowings outstanding at December 31, 1997 and 1996, were 6.5% and
6.4%, respectively.
At December 31, 1997, the Company had committed bank lines of credit aggregating $259 million
(of which $244 million were unused and $179 million were available) which make available interim
financing at various rates of interest based on LIBOR, the bank certificate of deposit rate, or other
options. These lines of credit are renewable annually at various dates throughout the year.
1997
Long-term debt outstanding at December 31,
(in millions)
First Mortgage Bonds - note (a)
5 12% Series paid in 1997
61% Series X paid in 1997
6¾% Series due 1999
7 %% Series W due 1999
8.33% Series due 2002
6%% Series Z due 2003
7.65% Series due 2003
67% Series due 2004
7¾% Series due 2004
72% Series X due 2007
6%% Series due 2008
7.61% 1997 Series due 2017
7.40% Series due 2020 note (b)
84% Series due 2021
8% Series due 2022
84% Series due 2022
7.15% Series due 2023
7% Series due 2024
5.45% Series due 2028 - note (b)
Other 6% -8.5% due 1999 through 2022
Environmental Improvement/Pollution Control Revenue Bonds
1984 Series A due 2014 - note (c)
1984 Series B due 2014 note (c)
1985 Series A due 2015 note (d)
1985 Series B due 2015 - note (d)
1990 Series B 7.60% due 2013
1991 Series due 2020 note (d)
1992 Series due 2022 - note (d)
1993 Series A 6 %% due 2028
1993 Series C-1 due 2026 note (e)
Other 4.375% - 7.6% due 2014 through 2028
Subordinated Deferrable Interest Debentures
7.69% Series A due 2036 - note (f)
Unsecured Loans
Commercial paper - note (g)
Credit agreements - note (h)
1991 Senior Medium Term Notes 8.60% due through 2005
1994 Senior Medium Term Notes 6.61% due through 2005
Nuclear Fuel Lease
Unamortized Discount and Premium on Debt
Maturities Due Within One Year
Total Long-Term Debt
100
50
75
40
100
188
85
50
148
40
60
125
85
104
75
100
44
186
1,655
57
559
66
35
21
54
62
172
117
(11)
(52)
1996
$2,506
40
43
3 08 50 75 0 0 18 35 50 148-60 125 254 75 10804
100
40
100
80 80 70 7 32 43 47 35 35 80
80 80 70 7 32 43 47 35 35 80
85
85
104
44
121
1,633
57
559
66
60
70
130
106
(13)
(146)
$2,335
(a) At December 31, 1997, substantially all of the property and plant was mortgaged under, and subject to liens of, the respective indentures
pursuant to which the bonds were issued.
(b) Environmental Improvement Series
(c) On June 1 of each year, the interest rate is established for the following year, or alternatively at the option of the Company, may be fixed until
maturity. A per annum rate of 3.95% is effective for the year ended May 31, 1998. Thereafter, the interest rates will depend on market condi-
tions and the selection of an annual versus remaining life rate by the Company. The average interest rate for the year 1997 was 3.83%.
(d) Interest rates, and the periods during which such rates apply, vary depending on the Company's selection of certain defined rate modes.
The average interest rates for the year 1997, for 1985 Series A, 1985 Series B, 1991 Series and 1992 Series bonds were 3.61%, 3.82%,
3.86%, and 3.83%, respectively.
-. .---
....NOTE 7 -
Income Taxes
(e) The interest rate for the year 1997 was 4.20%. This interest rate will be adjusted to a then-current market rate on August 15, 1998. Actual
interest rates, and the periods during which such rates apply, vary depending on the Company's selection of certain defined rate modes.
(f) During the terms of the debentures, the Company may, under certain circumstances, defer the payment of interest for up to five years.
(g) A bank credit agreement, due 1999, permits the Company to borrow or to support commercial paper borrowings up to $300 million.
Interest rates will vary depending on market conditions. At December 31, 1997, the outstanding commercial paper was at an average
annualized rate of 5.93%.
(h) Bank credit agreements, due 2002, permit the Company to borrow up to $42 million. Interest rates vary depending on market conditions
and the Company's selection of various options under the agreements. At December 31, 1997, the average annualized interes rate was 6.15%.
A bank credit agreement, due 1999, permits the Company to borrow up to $200 million. Interest rates will vary depending on market condi-
tions and the Company's selection of various options under the agreement. At December 31, 1997, no such borrowings were outstanding.
()
Maturities of long-term debt through 2002 are as follows:
(in millions)
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
Amounts for years subsequent to 1998 do not include nuclear fuel lease payments since the amounts
of such payments are not currently determinable.
Total income tax expense for 1997 resulted in an effective tax rate of 38% on earnings before
income taxes (40% in each of 1996 and 1995).
Principal reasons such rates differ from the statutory federal rate:
Statutory federal income tax rate:
Increases (Decreases) from:
Depreciation differences
State tax
Other
Effective income tax rate
Income tax expense components:
(in millions)
Taxes currently payable (principally federal):
Included in operating expenses
Included in other income Miscellaneous, net
Deferred taxes (principally federal):
Included in operating expenses
Depreciation differences
Postretirement benefits
Other
Included in other income
Depreciation differences
Other
Deferred investment tax credits, amortization:
Included in operating expenses
Total income tax expense
1997
35%
1
4
(2)
38%
1997
$261
261
(11)
(7)
10
Principal Amount
$ 52
209
49
44
134
(8)
(9)
$244
1996
35%
1
4
40%
1996
$255
255
2
5
8
(9)
$254
1995
35%
Ameran
1
4
40%
1995
$267
(1)
256
10
(9)
2
1
(9)
$261
In accordance with SFAS 109, "Accounting for Income Taxes," a regulatory asset, representing
the probable recovery from customers of future income taxes, which is expected to occur when
temporary differences reverse, was recorded along with a corresponding deferred tax liability. Also,
a regulatory liability, recognizing the lower expected revenue resulting from reduced income taxes
associated with amortizing accumulated deferred investment tax credits, was recorded. Investment
tax credits have been deferred and will continue to be credited to income over the lives of the
related property.
The Company adjusts its deferred tax liabilities for changes enacted in tax laws or rates.
Recognizing that regulators will probably reduce future revenues for deferred tax liabilities initially
recorded at rates in excess of the current statutory rate, reductions in the deferred tax liability
were credited to the regulatory liability.
35
▬▬▬▬▬▬36
NOTE 8 -
Retirement
Benefits
Temporary differences gave rise to the following deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities at
December 31:
(in millions)
Accumulated Deferred Income Taxes:
Depreciation
Regulatory assets, net
Capitalized taxes and expenses
Deferred benefit costs
Regulatory liabilities, net
Other
Total net accumulated deferred income tax liabilities
Funded Status of Pension Plans:
(in millions)
Actuarial present value of benefit obligation:
Vested benefit obligation
Accumulated benefit obligation
Projected benefit obligation for service rendered to date
Less: Plan assets at fair value*
(Excess) Deficiency of plan assets versus
projected benefit obligation
Unrecognized net gain
Unrecognized prior service cost
Unrecognized net assets at transition
Accrued pension cost at December 31
* Plan assets consist principally of common stocks and fixed income securities.
Components of Net Pension Expense:
(in millions)
Service cost-benefits earned during the period
Interest cost on projected benefit obligation
Actual return on plan assets
Net amortization and deferral
Pension cost
The Company has defined-benefit retirement plans covering substantially all of its employees.
Benefits are based on the employees' years service and compensation. The Company's plans are
funded in compliance with income tax regulations and federal funding requirements.
Following is the pension plan information related to AmerenUE's plans as of December 31:
Pension costs for the years 1997, 1996 and 1995, were $24 million, $28 million and $26 million,
respectively, of which approximately 17%, 19% and 20%, respectively was charged to construction
accounts.
Discount rate at measurement date
Increase in future compensation
Plan assets long-term rate of return
1997
$ 705
$ 829
$ 999
1,006
$
(7)
115
(69)
7
46
1997
$ 22
69
(134)
67
$ 24
1997
$1,045
451
176
(46)
(42)
9
$1,593
Assumptions for Actuarial Present Value of Projected Benefit Obligations:
1997
7.0%
4.0%
8.5%
1996
$661
$752
$919
924
(5)
96
(76)
$ 23
1996
$ 22
65
(107)
48
$28
1996
1996
7.5%
4.5%
8.5%
$1,070
488
210
(48)
(46)
23
$1,697
1995
$679
$758
$913
847
66
22
(82)
9
$ 15
1995
$ 19
66
(166)
107
$ 26
1995
7.25%
4.25%
8.5%AmerenCIPS uses a September 30 measurement date for its valuation of pension plan assets and liabili-
ties. Following is the pension plan information related to AmerenCIPS' plan as of December 31:
Pension costs for the years 1997, 1996 and 1995, were $5 million, $4 million and $6 million, respectively,
of which approximately 15% in 1997 and 1996 and 18% in 1995 was charged to construction accounts.
Funded Status of Pension Plan:
(in millions)
Actuarial present value of benefit obligation:
Vested benefit obligation
Accumulated benefit obligation
Projected benefit obligation for service rendered to date
Less: Plan assets at fair value*
(Excess) of plan assets versus projected
benefit obligation
Unrecognized net gain
Unrecognized prior service cost
Unrecognized net assets at transition
Components of Net Pension Expense:
(in millions)
Service cost-benefits earned during the period
Interest cost on projected benefit obligation
Actual return on plan assets
Net amortization and deferral
Pension cost
1997
$164
$190
$234
315
Discount rate at measurement date
Increase in future compensation
Plan assets long-term rate of return
(81)
76
(11)
3
(13)
(2)
$ (15)
Prepaid pension costs at September 30
Expense, net of funding October to December
Prepaid pension cost at December 31
* Plan assets consist principally of common and preferred stacks, bonds, money market instruments and real estate.
1997
$7
16
(60)
42
$5
Assumptions for Actuarial Present Value of Projected Benefit Obligations:
1997
7.5%
4.5%
8.5%
1996
$148
$171
$211
253
(42)
40
(11)
(10)
(1)
$ (11)
1996
$7
13
(30)
14
$ 4
1996
7.5%
4.5%
8.5%
1995
Ameren
$121
$142
$181
221
(40)
33
(5)
$ (8)
1995
$7
12
(34)
21
$6
1995
7.5%
4.5%
8.0%
In addition to providing pension benefits, the Company provides certain health care and life insur-
ance benefits for retired employees. Substantially all of the Company's employees may become eligi-
ble for those benefits if they reach retirement age while working for the Company. The Company
accrues the expected postretirement benefit costs during employees' years of service.
3738
The following is information related to AmerenUE's postretirement benefit plans as of December 31:
AmerenUE's funding policy is to annually contribute the net periodic cost to a Voluntary Employee
Beneficiary Association trust (VEBA). Postretirement benefit costs were $44 million for each of the
years 1997, 1996 and 1995, of which approximately 17% was charged to construction accounts in
1997 and 19% in each of 1996 and 1995. AmerenUE's transition obligation at December 31, 1997,
is being amortized over the next 15 years.
In August 1994, the MOPSC authorized the recovery of postretirement benefit costs in rates to
the extent that such costs are funded. In December 1995, the Company established two external
trust funds for retiree health care and life insurance benefits. For 1995, actual claims paid were
approximately $15 million. In 1997 and 1996, claims were paid out of the plan trust funds.
Funded Status of the Plans:
(in millions)
Accumulated postretirement benefit obligation:
Active employees eligible for benefits
Retired employees
Other active employees
Total benefit obligation
Less: Plan assets at fair market value*
Accumulated postretirement benefit obligation
in excess of plan assets
Unrecognized transition obligation
- gain/(loss)
Postretirement benefit liability at December 31
* Plan assets consist principally of common stocks and fixed income securities.
Components of Postretirement Benefit Cost:
(in millions)
Service cost-benefits earned during the period
Interest cost on projected benefit obligation
Actual return on plan assets
Amortization - transition obligation
- unrecognized gain
Deferred gain
Net periodic cost
Assumptions for the Obligation Measurements:
Discount rate at measurement date
Plan assets long-term rate of return
Medical cost trend rate initial
- ultimate
Ultimate medical cost trend rate expected in year
1997
$ 41
202
90
333
81
252
(187)
18
$ 83
1997
$12
23
(9)
12
(1)
7
$44
1997
7%
8.5%
7%
5%
2000
1996
$38
193
80
311
47
264
(200)
19
$83
1996
$12
22
12
(1)
3
$44
1996
7.5%
8.5%
8.25%
5.25%
2000
1995
$74
211
32
317
14
303
(213)
(7)
$ 83
1995
$10
24
|
12
A 1% increase in the medical cost trend rate is estimated to increase the net periodic cost and the
accumulated postretirement benefit obligation approximately $3 million and $23 million, respectively.
(2)
$44
1995
7.25%
8.5%
9.25%
5.25%
2000NOTE 9
Stock Option
Plans
The following is information related to AmerenCIPS' postretirement benefit plans as of December 31:
AmerenCIPS' funding policy is to fund the two VEBAS and the 401(h) account established within the
AmerenCIPS retirement income trust with the lessor of the net periodic cost or the amount deductible
for federal income tax purposes. AmerenCIPS uses a September 30 measurement date for its valuation
of postretirement assets and liabilities.
Postretirement benefit costs were $12 million for 1997, $16 million for 1996 and $17 million for
1995, of which approximately 17% was charged to construction accounts in 1997 and 15% in each
of 1996 and 1995. AmerenCIPS' transition obligation at December 31, 1997, is being amortized over
the next 15 years.
Funded Status of the Plans:
(in millions)
Accumulated postretirement benefit obligation:
Active employees eligible for benefits
Retired employees
Other active employees
Total benefit obligation
Less: Plan assets at fair market value*
Accumulated postretirement benefit obligation
in excess of plan assets
Unrecognized transition obligation
Components of Postretirement Benefit Cost:
(in millions)
Service cost-benefits earned during the period
Interest cost on projected benefit obligation
Actual return on plan assets
Amortization of transition obligation
Deferred gains
Net periodic cost
Assumptions for the Obligation Measurements:
1997
Discount rate at measurement date
Plan assets long-term rate of return
Medical cost trend rate - initial
- ultimate
Ultimate medical cost trend rate expected in year
$ 23
47
67
137
106
31
(84)
64
11
(7)
$ 4
- gain
Accrued postretirement benefit cost at September 30
Expense, net of funding, October to December
Postretirement benefit liability at December 31
* Plan assets consist principally of common and preferred stocks, bonds, money market instruments and real estate.
1997
$ 4
10
(21)
6
13
$ 12
1996
1997
7.25%
8.5%
8.5%
5.5%
2005
$ 20
54
65
139
71
68
(89)
38
17
(14)
$3
1996
$ 4
11
(9)
6
4
$16
1996
7.5%
8.5%
9.8%
4.5%
2005
1995
SE
$17
50
76
143
49
Ameren
94
(99)
24
19
(15)
$4
1995
$ 4
10
(8)
6
5
$17
A 1% increase in the medical cost trend rate is estimated to increase the net periodic cost and the
accumulated postretirement benefit obligation as of September 30, 1997 approximately $3 million and
$22 million, respectively.
1995
7.5%
8.0%
10.6%
4.0%
2007
AmerenUE has a long-term incentive plan (the Plan) for eligible employees. The Plan provides for the
grant of options, performance awards, restricted stock, dividend equivalents and stock appreciation
rights. Under the terms of the Plan, options may be granted at a price not less than the fair market value
of the common shares at the date of grant. Granted options vest over a period of five years, beginning
at the date of grant, and provide for acceleration of exercisability of the options upon the occurrence of
certain events, including retirement. Outstanding options expire on various dates through 2007. Under
the Plan, subject to adjustment as provided in the Plan, 2.5 million shares have been authorized to be
issued or delivered.
39
—————NOTE 10 -
Commitments
and Contingencies
40
Summary of Stock Options:
Options outstanding at beginning of the year
Options granted during the year
Options exercised during the year
Options expired/canceled during the year
Options outstanding at end of the year
Options exercisable at end of the year
Exercise price range of options granted
1997
307,390
195,880
7,200
496,070
134,785
$38.50
1996
142,500
165,590
700
307,390
39,710
1995
142,500
142,500
9,800
$43 $35.50-$35.875
In accordance with APB 25, no compensation cost has been recognized for the Company's stock com-
pensation plans. In 1996, the Company adopted the disclosure-only method under SFAS 123,
"Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation." If the fair value based accounting method under this
statement had been used to account for stock-based compensation cost, the effects on 1997, 1996 and
1995 net income and earnings per share would have been immaterial.
The Company's calculation of basic and diluted earnings per share resulted in the same earnings per
share amounts for each of the years 1997, 1996 and 1995. The reconciling item in each of the years is
comprised of assumed stock option conversions which increased the number of shares outstanding in
the diluted earnings per share calculation by 7,318 shares, 12,879 shares and 3,892 shares in 1997,
1996 and 1995, respectively.
The Company is engaged in a construction program under which expenditures averaging approximately
$333 million, including AFC, are anticipated during each of the next five years. This estimate does not
include any construction expenditures which may be incurred by the Company to meet new air quality
standards for ozone and particulate matter, as discussed later in this Note.
The Company has commitments for the purchase of coal under long-term contracts. Coal contract
commitments, including transportation costs, for 1998 through 2002 are estimated to total $1.5 billion.
Total coal purchases, including transportation costs, for 1997, 1996 and 1995 were $476 million, $514
million and $460 million, respectively. The Company also has existing contracts with pipeline and natur-
al gas suppliers to provide natural gas for distribution and electric generation. Gas-related contracted
cost commitments for 1998 through 2002 are estimated to total $212 million. Total delivered natural
gas costs for 1997, 1996 and 1995 were $160 million, $161 million and $127 million, respectively. The
Company's nuclear fuel commitments for 1998 through 2002, including uranium concentrates, conver-
sion, enrichment and fabrication, are expected to total $116 million, and are expected to be financed
under the nuclear fuel lease. Nuclear fuel expenditures for 1997, 1996 and 1995 were $35 million, $51
million and $42 million, respectively. Additionally, the Company has long-term contracts with other utili-
ties to purchase electric capacity. These commitments for 1998 through 2002 are estimated to total
$187 million. During 1997, 1996 and 1995, electric capacity purchases were $34 million, $44 million
and $42 million, respectively.
During 1996, the Company restructured its contract with one of its major coal suppliers. In 1997, the
Company paid a $70 million restructuring payment to the supplier, which allows them to purchase at
market prices low-sulfur, non-Illinois coal through the supplier (in substitution for the high-sulfur Illinois
coal the Company was obligated to purchase under the original contract); and would receive options for
future purchases of low-sulfur, non-Illinois coal from the supplier through 1999 at set negotiated prices.
By switching to low-sulfur coal, the Company was able to discontinue operating a generating
station scrubber. The benefits of the restructuring include lower cost coal, avoidance of significant
capital expenditures to renovate the scrubber and elimination of scrubber operations and mainte-
nance costs (offset by scrubber retirement expenses). The net benefits of restructuring are expected
to exceed $100 million over the next 10 years. In December 1996, the ICC entered an order approv-
ing the switch to non-Illinois coal, recovery of the restructuring payment plus associated carrying
costs (Restructuring Charges) through the retail FAC over six years, and continued recovery in rates of
the undepreciated scrubber investment plus costs of removal. Additionally, in May 1997 the FERC
approved recovery of the wholesale portion of the Restructuring Charges through the wholesale
FAC. As a result of the ICC and FERC orders, the Company classified the $72 million of the
Restructuring Charges made to the coal supplier in February 1997 as a regulatory asset and, through
December 1997, recovered approximately $10 million of the Restructuring Charges through the retail
FAC and from wholesale customers.
A group of industrial customers filed with the Illinois Third District Appellate Court (the Court) in
February 1997 an appeal of the December 1996 order of the ICC. On November 24, 1997, the Court
reversed the ICC's December 1996 order, finding that the Restructuring Charges were not direct costsof fuel that may be recovered through the retail FAC, but rather should be considered as a part of a
review of aggregate revenue requirements a full rate case. Restructuring Charges allocated to whole-
sale customers (approximately $7 million) are not in question as a result of the opinion of the Court. In
December 1997, the Company requested a rehearing by the Court; that request was denied. However,
the Court did rule that all revenues collected under the retail FAC in 1997 would not have to be
refunded to customers. The Company has appealed to the Illinois Supreme Court the Court's decision
that Restructuring Charges may not be recovered through the retail FAC.
The recoverability of the Restructuring Charges under the retail FAC in Illinois was also impacted by
the Electric Service Customer Choice and Rate Relief Law of 1997 (the Act). Among other things, the
Act provides utilities with the option to eliminate the retail FAC and limits the ability of utilities to file a
full rate case for its aggregate revenue requirements. After evaluating the impact of the Act on the
future recoverability of the Company's Restructuring Charges through future rates, the Company con-
cluded that the unamortized balance of the Illinois retail portion of its Restructuring Charges as of
December 31, 1997, should be written off ($34 million, net of income taxes). See Note 2 - Regulatory
Matters for further information.
The Company's insurance coverage for Callaway Nuclear Plant at December 31, 1997,
was as follows:
Type and Source of Coverage
(in millions)
Public Liability:
American Nuclear Insurers
Pool Participation
Nuclear Worker Liability:
American Nuclear Insurers
Property Damage:
American Nuclear Insurers
Nuclear Electric Insurance Ltd.
Replacement Power:
Maximum
Maximum
Coverages Assessments
for Single
Incidents
Nuclear Electric Insurance Ltd.
$ 200
8,720
$8,920 (b)
$ 200 (c)
$ 500
2,250 (d)
$2,750
79 (a)
$79
$3
Ameren
-$
$ 473 (e)
$ 4
(a) Retrospective premium under the Price-Anderson liability provisions of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, (Price-Anderson).
Subject to retrospective assessment with respect to loss from an incident at any U.S. reactor, payable at $10 million per year.
(b) Limit of liability for each incident under Price-Anderson.
(c) Industry limit for potential liability from workers claiming exposure to the hazard of nuclear radiation.
(d) Includes premature decommissioning costs.
(e) Weekly indemnity of $3.5 million, for 52 weeks which commences after the first 21 weeks of an outage, plus $2.8 million per week for
104 weeks thereafter.
11
$11
Price-Anderson limits the liability for claims from an incident involving any licensed U.S. nuclear
facility. The limit is based on the number of licensed reactors and is adjusted at least every five years
based on the Consumer Price Index. Utilities owning a nuclear reactor cover this exposure through a
combination of private insurance and mandatory participation in a financial protection pool as estab-
lished by Price-Anderson.
If losses from a nuclear incident at Callaway Plant exceed the limits of, or are not subject to, insur-
ance, or if coverage is not available, the Company will self-insure the risk. Although the Company
has no reason to anticipate a serious nuclear incident, if one did occur it could have a material but
indeterminable adverse effect on the Company's financial position, results of operations or liquidity.
Under the Title IV of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990, the Company is required to signifi-
cantly reduce total annual sulfur dioxide emissions by the year 2000. Significant reductions in nitro-
gen oxide are also required. By switching to low-sulfur coal and early banking of emission credits,
the Company anticipates that it can comply with the requirements of the law without significant rev-
enue increases because the related capital costs are largely offset by lower fuel costs. As of year-end
1997, estimated remaining capital costs expected to be incurred pertaining to Clean Air Act-related
projects totaled $107 million.
41
▬▬▬▬▬▬42
In July 1997, the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) issued final regulations revis-
ing the National Ambient Air Quality Standards for ozone and particulate matter. Although specific
emission control requirements are still being developed, it is believed that the revised standards will
require significant additional reductions in nitrogen oxide and sulfur dioxide emissions from coal-fired
boilers. In October 1997, the EPA announced that Missouri and Illinois are included in the area targeted
for nitrogen oxide emissions reductions as part of the EPA's regional control program. Reduction
requirements in nitrogen oxide emissions from the Company's coal-fired boilers could exceed 80% from
1990 levels by the year 2002. Reduction requirements in sulfur dioxide emissions may be up to 50%
beyond that already required by Phase II acid rain control provisions of the 1990 Clean Air Act
Amendments and could be required by 2007. Because of the magnitude of these additional reductions,
the Company could be required to incur significantly higher capital costs to meet future compliance
obligations for its coal-fired boilers or purchase power from other sources, either of which could have
significantly higher operations and maintenance expenditures associated with compliance. At this time,
the Company is unable to determine the impact of the revised air quality standards on its future finan-
cial condition, results of operations or liquidity.
In December 1997, the United States and numerous other countries agreed to certain environ-
mental provisions (the Kyoto Protocol), which would require decreases in greenhouse gases in an
effort to address the "global warming" issue. The Company is unable to predict what requirements,
if any, will be adopted in this country. However, implementation of the Kyoto Protocol in its present
form would likely result in significantly higher capital costs and operations and maintenance expendi-
tures by the Company. At this time, the Company is unable to determine the impact of these pro-
posals on its future financial condition, results of operations or liquidity.
As of December 31, 1997, the Company's utility operating subsidiaries were designated as poten-
tially responsible parties (PRP) by federal and state environmental protection agencies at five haz-
ardous waste sites. Other hazardous waste sites have been identified for which the Company may be
responsible but has not been designated a PRP.
Costs relating to studies and remediation and associated legal and litigation expenses at the sites
located in Illinois are being accrued and deferred rather than expensed currently, pending recovery
through rates. Through December 31, 1997, the total of the costs deferred, net of recoveries from insur-
ers and through environmental adjustment clause rate riders approved by the ICC, was $13 million.
The ICC has instituted a reconciliation proceeding to review the Company's environmental remedi-
ation activities in 1993, 1994 and 1995 and to determine whether the revenues collected under the
riders in 1993 were consistent with the amount of remediation costs prudently and properly
incurred. Amounts found to have been incorrectly included under the riders would be subject to
refund. In mid-1997, the Company and the ICC Staff submitted a stipulation with regard to all mat-
ters at issue which concluded that the amounts collected under the environmental rate rider were
appropriate in all material repects. A ruling from the ICC is still pending.
The Company continually reviews remediation costs that may be required for all of these sites.
Any unrecovered environmental costs are not expected to have a material adverse effect on the
Company's financial position, results of operations or liquidity.
The International Union of Operating Engineers Local 148 and the International Brotherhood of
Electrical Workers Local 702 filed unfair labor practice charges with the National Labor Relations
Board (NLRB) relating to the legality of the lockout by AmerenCIPS of both unions during 1993. The
NLRB has issued complaints against AmerenCIPS concerning its lockout. Both unions seek, among
other things, back pay and other benefits for the period of the lockout. The Company estimates the
amount of back pay and other benefits for both unions to be approximately $17 million. An adminis-
trative law judge of the NLRB has ruled that the lockout was unlawful. On July 23, 1996, the
Company appealed to the NLRB. The Company believes the lockout was both lawful and reasonable
and that the final resolution of the disputes will not have a material adverse effect on its financial
position, results of operations or liquidity.
Regulatory changes enacted and being considered at the federal and state levels continue to
change the structure of the utility industry and utility regulation, as well as encourage increased
competition. At this time, the Company is unable to predict the impact of these changes on its
future financial condition, results of operations or liquidity. (See Note 2 - Regulatory Matters for fur-
ther information.)
The Company is involved in other legal and administrative proceedings before various courts and
agencies with respect to matters arising in the ordinary course of business, some of which involve
substantial amounts. The Company believes that the final disposition of these proceedings will not
have a material adverse effect on its financial position, results of operations or liquidity.NOTE 11 -
Callaway Nuclear
Plant
NOTE 12-
Fair Value of
Financial
Instruments
Under the Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982, the DOE is responsible for the permanent storage and
disposal of spent nuclear fuel. The DOE currently charges one mill per nuclear-generated kilowatthour
sold for future disposal of spent fuel. Electric rates charged to customers provide for recovery of such
costs. The DOE is not expected to have its permanent storage facility for spent fuel available until at least
2015. The Company has sufficient storage capacity at Callaway Plant site until 2004 and is pursuing a
viable storage alternative. This alternative will require Nuclear Regulatory Commission approval. The
delayed availability of the DOE's disposal facility is not expected to adversely affect the continued opera-
tion of Callaway Plant.
Electric rates charged to customers provide for recovery of Callaway Plant decommissioning costs
over the life of the plant, based on an assumed 40-year life, ending with expiration of the plant's
operating license in 2024. The Callaway site is assumed to be decommissioned using the DECON
(immediate dismantlement) method. Decommissioning costs, including decontamination, dismantling
and site restoration, are estimated to be $451 million in current year dollars and are expected to
escalate approximately 4% per year through the end of decommissioning activity in 2033.
Decommissioning costs are charged to depreciation expense over Callaway's service life and amount-
ed to $7 million in each of the years 1997, 1996 and 1995. Every three years, the MOPSC requires
the Company to file updated cost studies for decommissioning Callaway, and electric rates may be
adjusted at such times to reflect changed estimates. The latest study was filed in 1996. Costs collect-
ed from customers are deposited in an external trust fund to provide for Callaway's decommission-
ing. Fund earnings are expected to average 9.25% annually through the date of decommissioning.
If the assumed return on trust assets is not earned, the Company believes it is probable that such
earnings deficiency will be recovered in rates. Trust fund earnings, net of expenses, appear on the
consolidated balance sheet as increases in the nuclear decommissioning trust fund and in the accu-
mulated provision for nuclear decommissioning.
The staff of the SEC has questioned certain current accounting practices of the electric utility
industry, regarding the recognition, measurement and classification of decommissioning costs for
nuclear generating stations in the financial statements of electric utilities. In response to these ques-
tions, the Financial Accounting Standards Board has agreed to review the accounting for removal
costs, including decommissioning. The Company does not expect that changes in the accounting for
nuclear decommissioning costs will have a material effect on its financial position, results of opera-
tions or liquidity.
The following methods and assumptions were used to estimate the fair value of each class of
financial instruments for which it is practicable to estimate that value.
Cash and Temporary Investments/Short-Term Borrowings
The carrying amounts approximate fair value because of the short-term maturity of these instruments.
Marketable Securities
The fair value is based on quoted market prices obtained from dealers or investment managers.
Nuclear Decommissioning Trust Fund
The fair value is estimated based on quoted market prices for securities.
Preferred Stock of Subsidiaries
The fair value is estimated based on the quoted market prices for the same or similar issues.
Long-Term Debt of Subsidiaries
The fair value is estimated based on the quoted market prices for same or similar issues or on the current
rates offered to the Company for debt of comparable maturities.
Carrying amounts and estimated fair values of the Company's financial instruments at December 31
were as follows:
(in millions)
Marketable securities
Preferred stock
Long-term debt (including current portion)
1997
Carrying
Amount
$ 32
235
2,558
1997
Fair
Value
$ 32
214
2,692
1996
Carrying
Amount
$ 51
299
2,482
Ameren
1996
Fair
Value
$ 51
257
2,545
43
:44
The Company has investments in debt and equity securities that are held in trust funds for the pur-
pose of funding the nuclear decommissioning of Callaway Nuclear Plant (see Note 11 - Callaway Nuclear
Plant). The Company has classified these investments in debt and equity securities as available for sale
and has recorded all such investments at their fair market value at December 31, 1997 and 1996. In
1997, 1996 and 1995, the proceeds from the sale of investments were $24 million, $20 million and $9
million, respectively. Using the specific identification method to determine cost, the gross realized gains
on those sales were approximately $2 million for 1997 and $1 million each for 1996 and 1995. Net real-
ized and unrealized gains and losses are reflected in the accumulated provision for nuclear decommis-
sioning on the consolidated balance sheet, which is consistent with the method used by the Company to
account for the decommissioning costs recovered in rates.
Costs and fair values of investments in debt and equity securities in the nuclear decommissioning trust
fund at December 31 were as follows:
1997 (in millions)
Security Type
Debt securities
Equity securities
Cash equivalents
1996 (in millions)
Security Type
Debt securities
Equity securities
Cash equivalents
Cost
$34
43
(in millions)
1 year to 5 years
5 years to 10 years
Due after 10 years
2
$79
Cost
$29
40
4
$73
Gross Unrealized
Gain
$ 3
40
$43
(Loss) Fair Value
$ 37
83
2
$122
Gross Unrealized
Gain
$2
22
$24
(Loss)
The contractual maturities of investments in debt securities at December 31, 1997 were as follows:
Fair Value
$ 4
Cost
$4
Fair Value
$31
62
24
$34
$97
26
$37Selected Consolidated Financial Information
(Millions of Dollars Except Shares and per Share Amounts and Ratics)
Results of Operations (Year ended December 31,
Operating revenues
Operating expenses
Operating income
Income before extraordinary charge
Extraordinary charge, net of income taxes
Net income
Average common shares outstanding 137,215,462
Long-term debt obligations
Preferred stock subject to
mandatory redemption
Preferred stock not subject to
mandatory redemption
Common equity
Assets, Obligations and Equity Capital (December 31,)
Total assets
Financial Indices (Year ended December 31,)
Earnings per share of common stock
before extraordinary charge
Extraordinary charge, net of income taxes
Earnings per share of common stock
(based on average shares outstanding)
Dividend payout ratio
Return on average common stock equity
Ratio earnings to fixed charges
1997
AmerenUE
AmerenCIPS
Book value per common share
Capitalization Ratios (December 31,)
Common equity
Preferred stock
Long-term debt
$3,327
2,744
582
387
52
335
$8,828
2,506
235
3,019
$2.82
$(.38)
$2.44
99%
11.14%
4.70
3.64
$22.00
52.4%
4.1
43.5
100.0%
1996
$3,328
2,752
576
372
372
137,215,462
$8,933
2,335
1
298
3,016
$2.71
$2.71
88%
12.51%
4.68
4.30
$21.98
53.4%
5.3
41.3
100.0%
1995
$3,236
2,658
578
373
$8,788
2,373
298
2,971
$2.72
$2.72
86%
12.76%
373
391
369
137,215,462 137,253,617 137,254,771
4.78
4.41
$21.65
1994
52.6%
5.3
42.1
100.0%
$3,270
2,685
585
391
$8,629
2,413
298
2,917
$2.85
$2.85
80%
13.69%
4.68
4.93
$21.25
1993
51.8%
5.3
42.9
100.0%
$3,272
2,724
548
369
$8,546
2,301
1
298
2,840
$2.69
$2.69
83%
13.18%
4.66
4.82
$20.69
52.2%
5.5
42.3
100.0%
1992
Ameren
$3,047
2,514
533
361
361
137,254,771
$7,631
2,213
1
283
2,781
$2.63
$2.63
82%
13.30%
4.66
4.12
$20.26
52.7%
5.4
41.9
100.0%
45
1Electric Operating Statistics
(Year Ended December 31,)
Electric Operating Revenues (Millions)
Residential
Commercial
Industrial
Wholesale
Interchange
EEI
ellaneous
Credit to customers
Total Electric Operating Revenues
Kilowatthour Sales (Millions)
Residential
Commercial
Industrial
Wholesale
Interchange
EEI
Miscellaneous
Total Kilowatthour Sales
Electric Customers (End of Year)
Residential
Commercial
Industrial
Wholesale
Miscellaneous
Total Electric Customers
AmerenUE
AmerenCIPS
AmerenCIPS
Coal Burned (Tons)
Price per Ton of Coal (Average)
Source of Energy Supply (Percent)
Coal
1997
Nuclear
Hydro
Purchased, net
$1,064
927
500
91
224
207
71
(20)
46
$3,064
Residential Customer Data (Average)
Kilowatthours used
Annual electric bill
Revenue per kilowatthour
Gross Instantaneous Peak Demand (Megawatts)
14,325
14,990
11,404
2,323
9,402
11,220
317
63,981
1,282,042
180,206
6,554
21
2,381
1,471,204
Capability at Time of Peak,
Including Net Purchases and Sales (Megawatts)
AmerenUE
AmerenCIPS
Generating Capability at Time of Peak (Megawatts)
Ameren UE
11,215
$833.34
7.38€
8,055
1,923
8,950
2,491
8,279
3,033
21,392,000
$23.54
83.8%
19.3
2.7
(5.8)
100.0%
1996
$1,070
920
500
91
280
198
50
(47)
$3,062
14,418
14,872
11,191
2,328
10,768
10,554
305
64,436
1,275,534
176,621
6,660
20
2,398
1,461,233
11,354
$842.82
7.30€
8,085
1,892
9,120
2,519
1995
79.6%
19.2
2.8
(1.6)
100.0%
$1,073
906
496
87
230
201
48
(33)
$3,008
14,086
14,464
10,971
2,248
8,176
10,850
316
61,111
1,267,976
173,810
6,782
21
2,434
1,451,023
11,152
$849.62
7.62%
7,965
1,940
8,714
2,489
8,244
8,184
3,033
3,018
20,062,000 17,715,000
$25.25
$26.86
76.3%
18.3
3.6
1.8
100.0%
1994
$1,014
884
487
84
243
276
42
$3,030
13,282
14,043
10,728
2,137
8,080
14,594
301
63,165
1,258,757
171,072
6,750
21
2,406
1,439,006
10,606
$809.27
7.63€
7,430
1,854
8,469
2,510
8,057
3,018
1993
76.2%
23.0
3.9
(3.1)
100.0%
$1,037
861
486
81
254
251
46
$3,016
13,636
13,642
10,407
2,088
10,326
12,521
317
62,937
1,248,723
168,566
7,137
21
2,407
1,426,854
10,946
$832.46
7.618
7,540
1,848
8,597
2,439
7,963
2,901
16,885,000 14,879,000
$28.02
$33.36
70.7%
19.5
4.6
5.2
100.0%
1992
$952
846
520
77
123
256
43
$2,817
12,103
12,964
11,371
1,953
4,387
14,037
307
57,122
1,243,863
166,912
7,067
23
2,367
1,420,232
9,683
$761.08
7.86€
7,135
1,649
8,407
2,534
7,868
2,881
14,843,000
$33.33
73.9%
19.5
3.5
3.1
100.0%
1
1
:Gas Operating Statistics
(Year Ended December 31):
Natural Gas Operating Revenues (Milions)
Residential
Commercial
Industrial
Off system sales
Miscellaneous
Total Natural Gas Operating Revenues
Dekatherm Sales (Millions)
Residential
Commercial
Industrial
Off system sales
Total Dekatherm Sales
Natural Gas Customers (End of Year)
Residential
Commercial
Industrial
Total Natural Gas Customers
1997
$150
55
22
13
10
$250
23
9
6
ло
5
43
263,588
30,147
412
294,147
1996
$161
61
21
11
$254
27
11
5
43
260,989
29,911
402
291,302
1995
$137
51
18
-
11
$217
24 10
5
39
257,848
29,446
378
287,672
1994
$138
53
24
10
$225
75 10 6
23
39
254,328
29,037
351
283,716
1993
$153
58
22
|
12
$245
26
10
6
42
251,171
28,676
307
280,154
Amaren
1992
$139
53
13
13
$218
22
am
9
3
34
248,707
28,393
261
277,361
4748
Ameren Corporation and Subsidiaries
Officers and Directors
OFFICERS
Ameren Corporation
Charles W. Mueller
Chairman, President and Chief
Executive Officer
Donald E. Brandt
Senior Vice President, Finance
William E. Jaudes
Vice President and General Counsel
Warner L. Baxter
Controller
Jerre E. Birdsong
Treasurer
James C. Thompson
Secretary
AmerenUE
Charles J. Schukai
Senior Vice President, Customer Services
William J. Carr
Vice President, Customer Services -
Regional
Garry L. Randolph
Vice President, Nuclear Operations
Robert J. Schukai
Vice President, Power Plants
William C. Shores
Vice President, Customer Services -
Metropolitan
AmerenCIPS
Gary L. Rainwater
President and Chief Executive Officer
William A. Koertner
Vice President, Finance & Administration
and Secretary
James T. Birkett
Vice President, Power Operations
Gilbert W. Moorman
Vice President, Regional Operations
D. Robert Patterson
Vice President, Regional Operations
Ameren Services
Paul A. Agathen
Senior Vice President, Energy
Supply Services
Donald W. Capone
Vice President, Engineering & Construction
1
John Peters MacCarthy ¹
M. Patricia Barrett
Vice President, Corporate Communications Retired Chairman and Chief Executive
Officer - Boatmen's Trust Company
Charles A. Bremer
Vice President, Information Services
Jimmy L. Davis
Vice President, Gas Support
Jean M. Hannis
Vice President, Human Resources
R. Alan Kelley
Vice President, Energy Supply
Michael J. Montana
Vice President, Supply Services
Craig D. Nelson
Vice President, Merger Coordination
Samuel E. Willis
Vice President, Industrial Relations
Ronald C. Zdellar
Vice President, Customer Services -
Division Support
Ameren Energy
Shannon B. Burchett
President
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Ameren Corporation
William E. Cornelius ¹
Retired Chairman and Chief Executive
Officer - Union Electric Company
Clifford L. Greenwalt ¹
Retired President and Chief Executive
Officer - CIPSCO Incorporated
Thomas A. Hays
1
Retired Deputy Chairman -
The May Department Stores Company
Richard A. Liddy ²
Chairman, President and Chief Executive
Officer - General American Life Insurance
Company, a provider of insurance
products and services
Richard A. Lumpkin
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer -
Consolidated Telephone Company, a
diversified telecommunications company
Gordon R. Lohman ¹
President and Chief Executive Officer -
AMSTED Industries, a diversified
manufacturer of industrial products
2
Hanne M. Merriman
Principal - Hanne Merriman Associates,
a retail business consulting firm
Paul L. Miller, Jr. ²
President and Chief Executive Officer -
P.L. Miller and Associates, a management
consulting firm
Charles W. Mueller ¹
President, Chief Executive Officer and
Chairman of the Board - Ameren
Corporation
Robert H. Quenon
Retired Chairman of the Board -
Peabody Holding Company, Inc
Harvey Saligman ²
Retired Managing Partner - Cynwyd
Investments, a real estate partnership
Charles J. Schukai ¹
Senior Vice President, Customer Services
AmerenUE
Janet McAfee Weakley'
1,2
President - Janet McAfee, Inc., a
residential real estate company
James W. Wogsland 2
Retired Vice Chairman - Caterpillar, Inc.
1 Member of Executive Committee
2 Member of Auditing Committee
Advisors to the Board
Charles Dougherty
Retired Chairman and Chief Executive
Officer - Union Electric Company
Thomas Jacobsen
Chairman, President and Chief Executive
Officer - Mercantile Bancorporation Inc.,
a bank holding company
3
1
i
1
1
.
ļ
?
5Investor Information
Common Stock and Dividend Information
Ameren's common stock is listed on the New York Stock
Exchange (ticker symbol: AEE). AEE began trading on January 2,
1998, following the merger on December 31, 1997, and is being
issued in exchange for Union Electric and CIPSCO Incorporated
common stock.
Common stockholders of record totaled 102,710 and 37,777
for Union Electric (UEP) and CIPSCO Incorporated (CIP),
respectively at December 31, 1997. The following includes the
price ranges and dividends paid per common share for UEP and
CIP during the past two years:
UEP
1997
Quarter Ended
March 31
June 30
September 30
December 31
1996
Quarter Ended
March 31
June 30
September 30
December 31
CIP
1997
Quarter Ended
March 31
June 30
September 30
December 31
1996
Quarter Ended
March 31
June 30
September 30
December 31
High
$39%
3713/16
38%
43¾
High
$44%
41%
40%
40%
High
$37
36%
38%16
45
High
$41%
38%
38½
38%
Low Dividends Paid
63½¢
63½
63%
63%
$36%
34½
36716
35%
Low Dividends Paid
62½¢
62½
62½
63½
$38%
38%
36
36%
Low Dividends Paid
$34%
52¢
33½
53
36
53
36%
53
Low Dividends Paid
51¢
52
52
52
$37%
35%
34%8
34%
Annual Meeting
The annual meeting of
Ameren common stockholders
and Union Electric and
CIPS preferred stockholders
will convene at 9 a.m.,
Tuesday, April 28, 1998, at
Powell Symphony Hall,
718 North Grand Boulevard,
St. Louis, Missouri.
DRPlus
Through DRPlus
Ameren's dividend reinvestment
and stock purchase plan -
stockholders, customers and
employees of Ameren and its
subsidiaries can:
• make cash investments by
check or automatic cash
payment, totaling up to
$120,000, in Ameren
common stock annually
reinvest their dividends in
Ameren common stock -
or receive Ameren dividends
in cash
place Ameren common stock
certificates in safekeeping
and receive regular account
statements.
If you have not yet
exchanged your Union Electric
or CIPSCO common stock
certificates for Ameren
common stock certificates,
please contact the Investor
Services Department.
This is not an offer to sell, or
a solicitation of an offer to buy,
any securities.
Direct Deposit of Dividends
All registered Ameren
common and Union Electric and
CIPS preferred stockholders can
have their cash dividends auto-
matically credited to their bank
accounts. This service gives
stockholders immediate access to
their dividend on the dividend
payment date and eliminates the
possibility of lost or stolen divi-
dend checks.
Ameren's Web Site
To obtain AEE's daily stock
price, recent financial statistics
and other information about
the company, visit Ameren's
home page on the internet.
Ameren's web site address is:
http://www.ameren.com
Investor Services
The company's Investor
Services representatives are
available to help you each
business day from 7:30 a.m.
to 4:30 p.m. (central time).
Please write or call:
Ameren Services Company
Investor Services Department
P.O. Box 66887
St. Louis, MO 63166-6887
St. Louis area 554-3502
Toll-free 1-800-255-2237
Office
One Ameren Plaza
1901 Chouteau Avenue
St. Louis, MO 63103
314-621-3222
Stock and First Mortgage
Bond Transfer Agent
and Registrar
Ameren Services Company
Positioned for Success 49Ameren
P.O. Box 66149
St. Louis, Missouri 63166
Ameren
Bulk Rate
U.S. Postage
PAID
Portland, OR
Permit No. 2917
------
▬▬ ▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬
A
.....