PRESIDENT'S LETTER
Dear Fellow Shareholders:
This is my first opportunity to address you in
an annual report since becoming the Company's
president in August 1989. As you are well aware,
these are exciting and challenging
times for the utility industry. I
believe you will agree, as you read
through this report, the Company is
positioning itself strategically for
the decade of the 1990s.
Purely from an earnings
standpoint, 1989 was a disappoint-
ing year as earnings per share
declined to $1.91 from $2.35 in
1988. Earnings were reduced
by 60 cents a share to recognize the
revenue and interest we proposed
to refund to our retail electric
customers.
We took this action in an
attempt to conclude a lengthy
proceeding which resulted from an
Illinois Commerce Commission
order issued in 1987. The order required the
Company to "show cause" why its rates should
not be reduced to reflect lower federal income tax
rates. The extended regulatory proceeding
produced uncertainty which overshadowed our
financial results and masked our operational
strengths.
Our proposal was to refund $40.3 million,
plus interest, to customers and to reduce electric
rates by $11 million annually. This proposal was
consistent with results of the analysis of the issue
by the commission's own staff.
As of this writing, the commission has not
acted to approve our proposal, but we hope this
uncertainty will be equitably resolved as soon as
possible. The details concerning this proceeding
are discussed on pages 14 and 15.
OTHER DEVELOPMENTS
Although the show cause proceeding remains
unresolved, there are a number of positive develop-
ments for your Company which I would like to
discuss.
The annualize i common stock dividend rate was
increased to $1.30 from $1.76, effective with the
June 1989 dividend. This was the eleventh consec-
utive year in which the dividend rate was increased.
For the third consecutive year we experienced
an increase in electric sales to our industrial custom-
ers. This is particularly heartening because in addi-
tion to greater revenues, the increased electricity
requirement typically means these customers are
experiencing success in their own lines of business.
This results in increased employment, purchase of
additional supplies, and other factors which have a
beneficial ripple effect throughout our communities.
We realized a significant increase in the amount
of income produced by our temporary investments,
primarily due to the rate of return we achieved on
these funds.
We filed a request with the Illinois Commerce
Commission in January 1990 for an increase of $11.6
million in natural gas revenues to improve earnings.
CIPS is committed to making the natural gas
business a vital and important contributor to future
corporate profits. Over the past several years, this
segment of our business has not earned a fair return
for shareholders.
Because the commission has up to 11 months
to decide this matter, a rate increase is not
expected to have significant impact on 1990
earnings.
HOLDING COMPANY PROPOSAL
The utility business is undergoing dramatic
change. Competition is much greater today because
of changes in state and federal regulations. As a
result, utility customers are gaining greater control
over how they will be served and who will serve
them. Independent power producers, co-generation
producers, alternate suppliers of natural gas, gas
brokers and others are competing for a utility's
business, without the constraints of traditional
utility regulation.
We must position ourselves strategically with
the flexibility to meet competition head-on. We
plan to do this by establishing a new corporate
structure with CIPSCO Incorporated as a holding
company and CIPS as a subsidiary.
This structure will permit us to act upon
potential business opportunities in a timely way.
which is not always possible within a regulated
utility.
It is expected that our electric and gas utility
business will continue to be the predominant
source of CIPSCO's earning power for the fore-
seeable future. Also, CIPSCO plans to invest in
longer-term financial instruments and unregulated,
energy-related projects opportuniti are
identified. Due to constraints in Illinois law concern-
ing public utilities, a regulated utility such as CIPS
might not be able to compete effectively for these
investment opportunities.
Although a few utility holding companies have
had disappointing results in their diversification
efforts, there are many, many instances where
utilities have successfully enhanced shareholder
value through investments outside their traditional
utility business. Our formula for successful diversi-
fication keys on limiting investments to those
which relate to management's knowledge and
experience. We believe that our proposed invest-
ment strategies meet these criteria and will be
in the best interests of the shareholders.
SHAREHOLDER APPROVAL REQUIRED
For the restructuring to take place, share-
holder approval is required. In the near future you
will receive proxy materials soliciting a favorable
vote on the proposal which will create CIPSCO
Incorporated as a holding company. The present
holders of CIPS common stock would become
holders of CIPSCO common stock.
I ask you to study the proxy materials carefully
and urge you to vote in favor of this proposal.
LOOKING FORWARD
Because of the record of achievement and
stability posted by the Company throughout the
1980s, we look to the 1990s with a sense of con-
fidence and optimism.
As we entered the previous decade, we were
in final stages of constructing our last generating
unit expected to be required in this century. When
this construction program concluded in late 1982,
our position as a reliable and low-cost energy
provider was solidified.
We have worked hard to contain our costs
and this experience will be important as we manage
our future. Today we are on the verge of a major
corporate restructuring which should position us
favorably in the competitive energy marketplace
of the new decade.
The dedication of our employees and the loyal
support of our shareholders have permitted us to
arrive successfully at the opening of the 1990s.
With such resources and commitments, we are
prepared to pursue and benefit from opportunities
the future may present.
Sincerely,
62. Greenwalt.
Clifford L. Greenwalt
President and Chief Executive Officer
CENTRAL ILLINOIS
PUBLIC SERVICE
COMPANY