FARBENIN
94 09 3683
SEC MAIL
ASH
RECEIVED
APR 1 2 1994
SH., D.C.
FA
106
PRO
ROCE
SECTION
1993
ANNUAL
REPORT
127-1270
PROCESSED BY
L9Q
APR 1 8 1994
DISCLOSURE INC.
ARIS
P.E.
12/31/93
El Paso Electric Co.ANNUAL MEETING OF SHAREHOLDERS
The annual meeting of El Paso Electric Co. will be held in the Sixth
Floor Conference Room of the Company's offices located at the
Centre ling, 123 Pioneer Plaza, El Paso, Texas, 79901, on
Monday, May 23, 1994, at 10 a.m., El Paso time. In connection with
this meeting, proxies will be solicited by the Board of Directors of
the Company. A notice of the meeting, together with a proxy
statement, a form of proxy and the Annual Report to Shareholders
for 1993, were mailed on or about April 12, 1994, to shareholders
of record as of March 25, 1994.FELLOW SHAREHOLDERS:
March 31, 1994
A
s most of you are aware, on
December 8, 1993, the U.S.
Bankruptcy Court for the
Western District of Texas entered an
order confirming El Paso Electric's
(EPE) plan of reorganization. The
plan, if approved by regulators,
would allow EPE to emerge from
bankruptcy as a wholly-owned sub-
sidiary of Central and South West
Corporation (CSW), a public utility
holding company based in Dallas,
Texas. The plan was confirmed fol-
lowing an overwhelming vote by all
of EPE's creditor groups and share-
holders. In fact, of those common
shareholders voting, 98 percent of
the shares were voted in favor of the
plan.
Confirmation of our plan of reorga-
nization paves the way for EPE to
emerge from bankruptcy in a healthy
financial position. Throughout this
process, our goal has been and
continues to be to secure a viable
solution that is fair and equitable for
EPE's creditors, shareholders, and
customers. Our plan of reorganiza-
tion and acquisition by CSW will
accomplish that goal.
On the effective date of the merger,
EPE common shareholders will re-
ceive CSW common stock in ex-
change for their EPE shares accord-
ing to a formula that valued EPE
common stock at $3.00 per share on
the confirmation date of the plan of
reorganization (approximately one-
tenth of a CSW common share for
every outstanding EPE common
share). Additional consideration to
EPE common shareholders (in the
form of CSW common shares hav-
ing a value of up to $1.50 pershare of
EPE common stock) may be realized
through the resolution of certain
matters and the sale of certain non-
utility assets. In connection with the
additional consideration that may be
achieved, in recent weeks EPE has
received approval from the Bank-
ruptcy Court to sell the assets of
Triangle Electric Supply Co., which
will result in the realization of ap-
proximately $10 million for EPE's
common shareholders. The Com-
pany hopes it will complete the sale
by the end of April 1994.
The Company also has filed a simi-
lar request for approval from the
Bankruptcy Court for the settlement
of federal income tax claims of the
IRS, which will result in the real-
ization of additional consideration
having value of approximately $27.8
million for EPE common share-
holders under the provisions of the
merger agreement. Assuming these
values are realized, they will be added
to the previously realized $2.3 mil-
lion and up to $13.8 million that will
be credited immediately prior to the
effective date of the merger. Thus,
EPE will achieve the maximum ad-
ditional consideration amount pro-
vided in the merger agreement. Value
also will be added for EPE common
shareholders based on the dividends
paid on CSW common stock between
the confirmation date of the plan of
reorganization and the effective date
of the merger.
Even with Bankruptcy Court confir-
mation and creditor and shareholder
support, however, the merger cannot
be accomplished and realized until
approvals are obtained from various
state and federal regulatory agen-
cies, including the Public Utility
Commission of Texas, the New
Mexico Public Utility Commission,
the Securities and Exchange Com-
mission, the Department of Energy,
the Federal Energy RegulatoryCommission, and the Nuclear Regu-
latory Commission, among others.
Thus, we anticipate the effective date
of the merger will be sometime be-
tween 18 and 24 months from the
confirmation date.
Toward that end, on January 10, EPE
filed for a $41.4 million (or 15 per-
cent) base rate increase in its Texas
jurisdiction. Because EPE's current
rates are not sufficient to cover the
cost of providing electric service to
our customers, a rate increase is
necessary for EPE to reorganize and
become financially viable. However,
CSW has offered our Texas cus-
tomers a settlement proposal that
would nullify nearly all the initial
effects of EPE's $41.4 million rate
request. The settlement seeks a lower
$25 million base rate increase from
Texas customers, offset by about.
$13 million in fuel savings and a
one-time $16.4 million fuel refund
to be credited to customers over 12
months. This means bills for EPE's
Texas customers would increase only
about 2 to 3 percent in the first year
of the merger.
There has been much local publicity
about the so-called "high rates" of El
Paso Electric. However, it is impor-
tant to put our rates in the proper
perspective as they affect the
Company's business, and the cost of
living and commerce in our service
territory. The fact is the average
electric bill for Texas residential
customers is about $52 per month.
This is among the lowest average
electric bill of any major city in Texas.
It also is in the lowest one-third per-
centile of average bills in the nation.
Further, an average household elec-
tric bill in our service area represents
only 2.3 percent of median house-
hold income. This is lower than most
other areas of Texas and below the
national average.
Merging El Paso Electric into the
Central and South West operating
system will yield economies of scale
that will benefit our customers
rate increases will be stabilized and
substantially lower than if El Paso
Electric had remained an indepen-
dent stand-alone company. These
efficiencies will help lower the
WE
FINALLY
HAVE IDENTIFIED
AND
ARE MOVING
TOWARD A
VIABLE SOLUTION,
AND
THE POTENTIAL
BENEFITS
TO OUR
SHAREHOLDERS,
CREDITORS
AND
CUSTOMERS
ARE SIGNIFICANT.
Company's operating and mainte-
nance costs. And, perhaps more im-
portantly, the merger will guarantee
that electric service will continue to
be reliable for all customers in El
Paso Electric's service territory for
many years to come.
El Paso Electric is an attractive ac-
quisition candidate because our ser-
vice territory and total number of
customers continue to grow, while
other areas throughout the southwest
and the country are experiencing
limited growth in electricity sales.
The Company once again achieved
record peak demands in 1993, re-
cording an all-time total system peak
demand of 1,335 megawatts (MW)
on August 11, which was a 2.5 per-
cent increase over the prior record
peak of 1,302 MW in 1992. EPE's
1993 native peak demand of 997
MW also was a new record, in-
creasing 2.4 percent from a peak of
974 MW in 1992. In addition, native
system sales and total system sales
increased 1.8 and 2.9 percent, re-
spectively, over the previous year,
and our total number of customers
increased 2.8 percent. Looking
ahead, we continue to expect steady
electrical and economic growth in
the communities we serve.
Further, the recent approval of the
North American Free Trade Agree-
ment should enhance continued
growth in our service territory, and
provide the opportunity for increased
sales into the Republic of Mexico.
This is yet another reason that Cen-
tral and South West negotiated a
merger agreement with EPE. Not
only does our Company offer a solid,
growing service territory, but it pro-
vides CSW with increased transmis-
sion access to the western U.S. and
Mexico.
El Paso Electric currently has a con-
tract with Mexico through 1996 to
provide up to 150 megawatts of firm
power sales to Mexico's rapidly
growing northern border area. These
sales continue, and our relationship
with Mexico and its representatives
is excellent. Central and South West
also has a long-standing relationship
with Mexico. In fact, in late-1993,
CSW announced the opening of newoffices located in Mexico City to
foster an already strong relationship
with that country's government and
industry, and to pursue further elec-
trical sales into Mexico.
In an effort to posture our company
better in anticipation of its merger
into the Central and South West
system, the Company reduced its
number of senior managers in early-
1994. These personnel reductions
allowed EPE to reduce layers of
management and to begin aligning
itself more closely with CSW in
anticipation of the completion and
implementation of the merger.
In addition, the Company and CSW
have implemented a transition pro-
cess. We will emphasize external
and internal communications to ad-
dress and accommodate concerns of
employees and shareholders more
effectively, and to foster improved
relations and acceptance by our
community leaders, citizens and
customers. This process will be
spearheaded by Curtis L. Hoskins.
Curt has been the Company's chlef
operating officer since May 1990
and was elected president in January
of this year. Curt's work, leadership
and assistance to me has been in-
valuable over the past four years,
and his experience with utility
mergers will continue to be extremely
important as we go forward to
complete this process.
Eduardo A. Rodriguez also was pro-
moted to senior vice president and
general counsel. Eddie's oversight
and leadership of the legal facets of
the bankruptcy and merger processes
have been and continue to be -
instrumental in achieving a very
successful solution.
In summary, while this past year has
been difficult, it also has been
punctuated by success. When it was
clear that EPE could not emerge from
bankruptcy as a stand-alone com-
pany, the next alternative was to
identify a strong, viable and highly-
respected entity to negotiate a busi-
ness combination or merger. Our
merger into the Central and South
West system will have positive,
lasting effects on each constituency
that EPE serves.
We finally have identified and are
moving toward a viable solution,
and the potential benefits to our
shareholders, creditors and cus-
tomers are significant. Yet, we still
face the complex and demanding
challenges of obtaining regulatory
approvals during this transition pe-
riod. Rest assured that all of us at
EPE remain fully dedicated to com-
pleting this merger in a timely and
efficient manner.
Finally, in closing, I particularly want
to thank our employees, who con-
tinue to perform at exceptional lev.
els during a very difficult period of
time. They are the strength of our
Company, and I congratulate them
on their ability to stay focused and to
continue providing superior cus-
tomer service and administrative
support. I also want to thank each
member of EPE's Board of Direc-
tors for their strong leadership, and
for their tremendous commitment of
time, energy and resources in getting
this process accomplished. Thus, I
encourage you to vote your proxy
for the three EPE Board members
who are currently slated for re-elec-
tion. Finally, and most significantly,
I wish to thank you our sharehold-
ers- for your continued support of
EPE's Board, senior management
and employees.
One final note - this letter to share-
holders presents only an overview.
For a comprehensive discussion of
our plan and the merger agreement
with CSW, I encourage you to read
the detailed discussion of these and
other important issues facing our
Company contained in the attached
Annual Report on Form 10-K. We
will, of course, keep you informed of
future developments.
Sincerely,
Quarr.adge.f
David H. Wiggs, Jr.
Chairman of the Board
and Chief Executive OfficerBOARD
OF DIRECTORS
David H. Wiggs, Jr. (6)
Chairman of the Board
and Chief Executive Officer
Wilfred E. Binns (11)
President and Sole Shareholder,
Binns Construction &
calty, Inc.,
Las Cruces, New Mexico
Sidney G. Baucom (2)
Of Counsel, Jones, Waldo, Holbrook
& McDonough, Salt Lake City, Utah
Wilson K. Cadman (1)
Retired in 1992. Prior to retirement,
Chairman of the Board, President and
Chief Executive Officer, Kansas Gas
& Electric Co., Wichita, Kansas
James A. Cardwell (4)
President and Principal Shareholder,
Cardwell Properties, Inc., El Paso,
Texas (multi-business holding and
investment company)
George W. Edwards, Jr. (1)
President and Chief Executive
Officer, Kansas City Southern
Railway Co., Kansas City, Missouri
Curtis L. Hoskins (4)
President & Chief Operating Officer
Josefina A. Salas-Porras (15)
Educator, El Paso, Texas
(consultant in second language and
multi-cultural training)
Thomas C. Simpson (11)
President and Principal Shareholder,
Simpson Farms, Inc., Las Cruces,
N.M.
COMPANY
| OFFICERS
David H. Wiggs, Jr. (6)
Chairman of the Board
and Chief Executive Officer
Curtis L. Hoskins (4)
President & Chief Operating Officer
Eduardo A. Rodriguez (12)
Senior Vice President
and General Counsel
Julius F. Bates, Jr. (22)
Vice President-Customer Services
John E. Droubay (4)
Vice President and Treasurer
Russell G. Gibson (4)
Controller
and Chief Accounting Officer
Gary R. Hedrick (16)
Vice President-Financial Planning
and Rate Administration
John C. Horne (21)
Vice President-
Transmission Systems Division
James A. Mayhew (14)
Vice President-
Rates and Energy Utilization
Robert C. McNiel (16)
Vice President-
New Mexico Division
Guillermo Silva, Jr. (15)
Secretary
() Years of Service
|SHAREHOLDER
INFORMATION
Shareholders may obtain informa-
tion relating to their share position,
dividends, transfer requirements,lost
certificates, and other related mat-
ters by telephoning BONY Share-
holder Services at 1-800-524-4458.
This service is available to all share-
holders Monday through Friday,
8 a.m. to 6 p.m., Eastern Time.
Shareholders also may obtain this
information by writing to:
Shareholder Relations Dept.,
Bank of New York
Church Street Station
P.O. Box 11258
New York, New York 10286-1258.
| SHAREHOLDER
INQUIRIES
Shareholders should direct questions
about the activities and operating
results of the Company to:
The Office of the Secretary
El Paso Electric Company
P.O. Box 982
El Paso, Texas 79960.
Or call: 1-800-592-1634 or
1-800-351-1621.
SECURITIES
| AND RECORDS
The common stock of El Paso Elec-
tric Company is traded and quoted
on the NASDAQ Stock Market. The
ticker symbol for the common stock
is ELPAQ. ("Q" indicates Company
is operating under Chapter 11 of the
United States Bankruptcy Code.)
El Paso Electric and The Bank of
New York (BONY) act as co-trans-
fer agents and co-registrars for the
Company's common and preferred
stock. BONY maintains all share-
holder records of the Company.
FORM 10-K
REPORT
A complete copy of El Paso
Electric's Annual Report on Form
10-K for the year ended December
31, 1993, which has been filed
with the Securities and Exchange
Commission, including Financial
Statements and Financial State-
ment schedules, will be provided
to shareholders without charge
upon written request to:
The Office of the Secretary
El Paso Electric Company
Post Office Box 982
El Paso, Texas 79960.(Mark One)
Form 10-K
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF
THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 (FEE REQUIRED)
For the fiscal year ended December 31, 1993
OR
TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF
THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 (NO FEE REQUIRED)
to
For the transition period from
Commission file number 0-296
El Paso Electric Company
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
74-0607870
(I.R.S. Employer
Identification No.)
Texas
(State or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
303 North Oregon Street, El Paso, Texas
(Address of principal executive offices)
79901
(Zip Code)
Registrant's telephone number, including area code: 915-543-5711
None of the Registrant's Securities is Registered Pursuant to
Section 12(b) of the Act
Securities Registered Pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act:
COMMON STOCK, NO PAR VALUE
(Title of Class)
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed
by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months
(or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has
been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. YES X NO
Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item 405 of
Regulation S.K is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of registrant's
knowledge in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in
Part III of this Form 10-K or any amendment to this Form 10-K. [X]"
As of March 1, 1994, the aggregate market value of the voting stock held by non-affiliates
of the registrant was $93,173,349.
As of March 1, 1994, there were outstanding 35,544,330 shares of common stock, no par
value.
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
Portions of the registrant's definitive Proxy Statement for the 1994 annual meeting of its
shareholders are incorporated by reference in to Part III of this report.The following abbreviations, acronyms or defined terms used in this report are defined below:
Abbreviations,
Acronyms or Defined Terms
ADR
AFUDC
AIP
ANPP Participation Agreement
APB
APS
Bankruptcy Case
Bankruptcy Court
Bankruptcy Code
CCN
CFE
Common Plant or Common
Facilities
Company
Confirmation Date
CSW
CSW Sub
CWIP
Disclosure Statement
DOE
DOJ
EPA
Effective Date
EPE
FERC
FPA
Four Corners
Franklin or Franklin Land
FTC
HSR Act
IID
IRS
KV
KW
DEFINITIONS
KWH
LIBOR
Merger Agreement
Terms
Arizona Department of Revenue
Allowance for Funds Used During Construction
Arizona Interconnection Project
Arizona Nuclear Power Project Participation Agreement dated
August 23, 1973, as amended
Accounting Principles Board
Arizona Public Service Company
The case commenced January 8, 1992 by El Paso Electric
Company in the Bankruptcy Court as Case No. 92-10148-FM
United States Bankruptcy Court for the Western District of
Texas, Austin Division
United States Bankruptcy Code, 11 C. S. C. §101 et seq.
Certificate of Convenience and Necessity
Comision Federal de Electricidad - Mexico
Facilities at or related to the Palo Verde Station that are
common to all three Palo Verde Units
El Paso Electric Company
December 8, 1993; the date the Plan was confirmed by the
Bankruptcy Court
Central and South West Corporation
A wholly-owned special purpose subsidiary of CSW to be
formed in connection with the transactions contemplated by
the Merger Agreement
Construction Work in Progress
Disclosure Statement related to Modified Third
Amended Plan of Reorganization
United States Department of Energy
United States Department of Justice
United States Environmental Protection Agency
The date the Plan becomes effective
El Paso Electric Company
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
Federal Power Act
Four Corners Project or Four Corners Plant
Franklin Land & Resources, Inc., a former subsidiary of
the Company
Federal Trade Commission
Hart-Scott Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act of 1976
Imperial Irrigation District, an irrigation district in
Southern California
Internal Revenue Service
Kilovolt(s)
Kilowatt(s)
Kilowatt-hour(s)
The rate of interest, per annum, equal to the London Interbank
Offered Rate (90-day LIBOR for 1994 is assumed to be 3.5%)
Agreement and Plan of Merger dated as of May 3, 1993 among
the Company, CSW and CSW Sub, as amended
(i)
4Abbreviations,
Acronyms or Defined Terms
MW
MWH
NASD
NASDAQ
Navajo Nation
New Mexico Commission or
NMPUC
NMED
NOL
NRC
Owner Participants
Owner Trustee
Palo Verde Participants
Palo Verde Station or
Palo Verde Project or
Palo Verde or PVNGS
Plan
PNM
PUHCA
RCF
Reorganized EPE
SEC
SFAS
SPS
TEP
Texas Commission
Texas District Court
TNP
TNRCC
Megawatt(s)
Megawatt-hour(s)
Terms
National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc.
National Association of Securities Dealers Automated
Quotation System
Navajo Nation of Indians
New Mexico Public Utility Commission
New Mexico Environment Department
Net Operating Loss
Nuclear Regulatory Commission
The entities that participate as equity investors in the
trusts that, through the Owner Trustee, purchased and
leased back portions of the Company's interests in
Palo Verde Units 2 and 3
The First National Bank of Boston, which acted as purchaser and
lessor under the sale and leaseback transactions involving
Palo Verde Units 2 and 3, in its capacity as trustee for the
trusts established for the benefit of the Equity Participants
Those utilities who share in power and energy entitlements,
and bear certain allocated costs, with respect to PVNGS
pursuant to the ANPP Participation Agreement
Palo Verde Nuclear Generating Station
Modified Third Amended Plan of Reorganization
Public Service Company of New Mexico
Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935
Revolving Credit Facility pursuant to the Credit Agreement
dated as of October 26, 1989, as amended, among El Paso
Electric Company, each of the Banks signatory thereto, and
Chemical Bank, as Agent Bank
El Paso Electric Company after completion of its reorganization
in bankruptcy
Securities and Exchange Commission
Statement of Financial Accounting Standards
Southwestern Public Service Company
Tucson Electric Power Company
Public Utility Commission of Texas
State District Court of Travis County, Texas
Texas-New Mexico Power Company
Texas Natural Resources Conservation Commission,
successor to the Texas Air Control Board and the Texas Water
Commission
(ii)Item
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Description
8
9
PARTI
1
Business
2 Properties
3 Legal Proceedings
4
Submission of Matters to a Vote of Security Holders
PART II
5 Market for Registrant's Common Equity and Related Stockholder Matters
6 Selected Financial Data
7
Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition
and Results of Operations
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial
Disclosure
PART III
10 Directors and Executive Officers of the Registrant
11 Executive Compensation
12 Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management
13 Certain Relationships and Related Transactions
PART IV
14 Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules, and Reports on Form 8-K
(iii)
Page
1
41
41
43
44
46
47
60
115
115
115
115
115
115Item 1. Business
PARTI
Introduction
The Company was incorporated in Texas in 1901. Its business is the generation and distribution
of electricity through an interconnected system to approximately 262,000 customers in El Paso, Texas,
and an area of the Rio Grande Valley in West Texas and Southern New Mexico, and to wholesale
customers located in such diverse locations as Southern California and Mexico. The Company had
approximately 1,140 employees as of December 31, 1993, approximately 29% of which are covered by a
collective bargaining agreement that expires in February 1995. The Company's principal offices are
located at 303 North Oregon Street, El Paso, Texas 79901 (telephone 915/543-5711).
The Company's service area extends approximately 110 miles northwesterly from El Paso to the
Caballo Dam in New Mexico and approximately 120 miles southeasterly from El Paso to Van Horn,
Texas. The service area has an estimated population of 784,000, including approximately 631,000
people in the metropolitan area of El Paso. Copper smelting and refining, oil refining, garment
manufacturing, cattle raising and agriculture are significant industries in El Paso, which is also an
important transportation and distribution center. Historically, the Company's major franchises have
been with the cities of El Paso, Texas, and Las Cruces, New Mexico. The franchise with the City of
El Paso expires in March 2001 and does not contain renewal provisions. The Company's 25-year
franchise with the City of Las Cruces expired in March 1993 and the Company and the City entered
into a one-year franchise agreement while negotiations for a long-term agreement continued. The
one-year franchise expired March 18, 1994, and the parties continue to negotiate. For a discussion of
the status of the Company's major franchises and major customers, including the potential loss of
certain of such franchises and customers, see Part II, Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis
of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Operational Challenges."
Bankruptcy Proceedings for Reorganization of the Company
Filing
On January 8, 1992, the Company filed a voluntary petition for reorganization under Chapter 11
of the Bankruptcy Code in the Bankruptcy Court. The filing followed an attempt by the Company
during 1991 to negotiate a restructuring of its obligations with its creditors and the draws in late
December 1991 on letters of credit related to the Company's sale and leasebacks of portions of its
interest in Palo Verde. The Company's management has continued to manage the operations and
affairs of the Company, subject to the authority of the Company's Board of Directors, as debtor in
possession. Certain actions of the Company during the pendency of the bankruptcy proceedings,
however, including, without limitation, transactions outside of the ordinary course of business, are
subject to the approval of the Bankruptcy Court. In addition, with the execution of the Merger
Agreement (described herein), certain actions may be prohibited or limited or the consent of or notice
to CSW required.
Effect of Bankruptcy on Disclosures Contained Herein
The discussions and descriptions of Company events and the analysis of their potential impact on
financial results herein are premised on the assumption that the Company's operations will be
maintained within existing financial agreements, as modified by the Plan, and regulatory structures
prior to the Effective Date of the Plan. This report must be read with the understanding that the Plan,
which has been confirmed by the Bankruptcy Court, but has not become effective, will alter,
compromise or modify the existing financial and regulatory structures if it becomes effective.
Substantial conditions to the Plan becoming effective exist, as discussed herein, and the Company
believes, but can give no assurance, that such conditions will be satisfied. It is possible that the Plan
will not become effective. If the Plan does not become effective, another plan of reorganization also
1would alter, compromise or modify existing financial and regulatory structures. See "Alternatives to
the Plan," below. It is therefore not possible at this time to state with certainty the nature or degree to
which the existing financial and regulatory structures will be altered, compromised or modified.
Accordingly, estimates and evaluations based on the historical results of Company operations could be
subject to material changes as a result of the eventual resolution of the Bankruptcy Case.
Modified Third Amended Plan of Reorganization
On September 8, 1992, the Company filed a plan of reorganization, which was amended
subsequently, based on the Company remaining an independent company. On December 8, 1992, the
Company began solicitation of the plan of reorganization, but suspended solicitation on December 23,
1992, following a ruling by the Bankruptcy Court in a pending adversary proceeding. See "Treatment
of Palo Verde" below.
Concurrently with pursuing the initial plan of reorganization, the Company had engaged in an
analysis of potential combinations with other companies in the event the stand-alone plan of
reorganization could not be consummated. On May 3, 1993, the Company and CSW entered into the
Merger Agreement, which provides for the Company to become a wholly-owned subsidiary of CSW.
On May 5, 1993, the Company filed its Third Amended Plan of Reorganization and Third Amended
Disclosure Statement in connection with the Merger Agreement, which was modified subsequently,
The related disclosure statement was approved by the Bankruptcy Court by orders dated August 27,
1993, and September 15, 1993, and solicitation of the Plan began shortly thereafter. On November 15,
1993, voting on the Plan concluded, with at least 92% of those voting in each applicable class of
creditors and interest holders voting in favor of the Plan.
Prior to the confirmation of the Plan, certain technical modifications to the Plan that did not
require creditor or interest holder approval were made. On December 8, 1993, the Bankruptcy Court
entered an order confirming the Plan. A description of the primary features of the Plan is set forth
below.
Description of the Merger
The Plan proposes a reorganization of the Company pursuant to which the Company would
become a wholly-owned subsidiary of CSW. Under the Plan, creditors and equity security holders of
the Company would receive for their claims cash and/or securities of either the Company, as
reorganized, and/or securities of CSW or would have their claims cured and reinstated pursuant to the
Bankruptcy Code. Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, and effective simultaneously with the
effectiveness of the Plan, CSW Sub would merge with and into the Company (the "Merger"), and CSW
would become the owner of all of the issued and outstanding shares of common stock of the Company.
The Company would continue to operate as a public utility company and would become a direct,
wholly-owned, operating subsidiary of CSW. The Company's shareholders would receive
consideration as described below. Secured creditors generally would receive value equal to 100% of
their allowed claim. Small unsecured creditors also would receive 100% of their allowed claim and
other unsecured creditors would receive 95.5% of the principal amount of their allowed claim and
would receive interest on the 95.5% amount on a current basis through the Effective Date, as described
more fully below.
CSW, a Delaware corporation, is a registered holding company under the PUHCA, CSW owns all
of the outstanding shares of common stock of Central Power and Light Company ("CPL"), Public
Service Company of Oklahoma ("PSO"), Southwestern Electric Power Company ("SWEPCO"), and
West Texas Utilities Company ("WTU”) (collectively, the "CSW Electric Operating Companies"), and
has certain other subsidiaries and affiliates. The CSW Electric Operating Companies are public
utility companies engaged in generating, purchasing, transmitting, distributing and selling
electricity. CPL and WTU operate in portions of south and central west Texas, respectively; PSO
2operates in portions of eastern and southwestern Oklahoma; and SWEPCO operates in portions of
northeastern Texas, northwestern Louisiana and western Arkansas.
Certain conditions specified in the Plan and the Merger Agreement must be satisfied or waived
prior to the Effective Date of the Plan for the Merger to be consummated and the Plan to become
effective. A summary of such conditions is set forth below.
Conditions to Effectiveness of the Plan and Merger
The Merger will become effective upon the issuance of a certificate of merger by the Secretary of
State of Texas or at such later time as may be provided in Articles of Merger that will be filed with the
Secretary of State of Texas upon the satisfaction of all conditions to effectiveness of the Plan and
Merger. The Merger Agreement and Plan contain numerous conditions to effectiveness, including but
not limited to the following described conditions:
(i)
receipt of the regulatory approvals and determinations that, in the judgment of the
Company and CSW, are reasonably required to implement the provisions of the Plan and
consummate the Merger. Such regulatory approvals generally include approvals and/or
determinations by the FERC, the SEC, the Texas Commission, the New Mexico
Commission and the NRC, as well as a filing with both the FTC and DOJ pursuant to the
HSR Act and the expiration or termination of the waiting period applicable to such filing;
(ii) the absence of occurrences that result or could result in a material adverse effect on the
Company or CSW;
(iii) performance by the Company, CSW and CSW Sub of all covenants contained in the Merger
Agreement; and
(iv) receipt of an investment-grade rating for all publicly tradeable Reorganized EPE First
Mortgage Bonds and Reorganized EPE Second Mortgage Bonds.
Other than certain regulatory or statutory approvals that may not be waived, CSW and the
Company may waive all or any portion of any of the conditions to effectiveness of the Plan and Merger.
A number of the conditions have already been satisfied or have had significant steps taken toward
their satisfaction: the Plan was confirmed on December 8, 1993; settlements (that become effective on
the Effective Date) were entered into on November 15, 1993 (and have been approved by the
Bankruptcy Court) resolving the adversary proceeding between the Company and the Palo Verde
Owner Participants and providing for the transfer back to the Company of title to the leased portions
of Palo Verde on the Effective Date; a capital structure for the Company as of the Effective Date has
been designed that the Company believes will meet the rating agencies' requirements for an
investment-grade rating; and applications have been filed with the FERC, NRC, SEC, the Texas
Commission and the New Mexico Commission, as discussed more fully in "Regulatory Aspects of the
Plan and Merger," below. Nevertheless, the conditions to effectiveness are significant and there can
be no assurance that all such conditions will be satisfied.
Regulatory Aspects of the Plan and Merger
Consummation of the Plan and Merger is conditioned on receipt of required regulatory approvals,
including those discussed below. In addition, Section 1129 (a) (6) of the Bankruptcy Code provides that
a plan of reorganization may be confirmed only if any governmental regulatory commission with
jurisdiction, after confirmation of the plan, over rates of the debtor has approved any rate change
provided in the plan, or such rate change is expressly conditioned on such approval. The effectiveness
of the Plan is expressly conditioned upon obtaining Texas and New Mexico orders, including rate
orders, establishing certain rate making, accounting and regulatory treatments acceptable to CSW
3unless this condition is waived by CSW and the Company. There is no anticipated change to rates
charged FERC jurisdictional customers under the Plan. Under the Merger Agreement, CSW is given
the right to designate lead counsel with respect to, and control all applications, notices, petitions and
filings relating to, the regulatory approvals and determinations described herein that are conditions to
the effectiveness of the Merger. The Merger Agreement provides that both CSW and the Company are
required to use reasonable best efforts to secure such approvals and determinations. The Merger
Agreement further provides that CSW must use reasonable efforts in controlling the applications,
notices, petitions and filings to preserve the Company's ability to file independent rate proceedings
with and seek rates from appropriate Texas regulatory authorities based upon the Company's own cost
of service components (assuming the Merger is not consummated), in the event that the Company
seeks rate relief in any independent proceeding not precluded by the Merger Agreement.
Proposed Texas Rate Treatment. The effectiveness of the Plan and the Merger is conditioned
upon the receipt by the Company and CSW of the following Texas regulatory approvals and
determinations unless such conditions are waived by CSW and the Company:
(i)
a final order of the Texas Commission satisfactory to CSW and the Company authorizing a
base rate increase of $25 million to be effective for the Company in 1994 and authorizing
certain ratemaking, accounting and regulatory treatments of the assets, expenditures,
costs and revenues of the Company;
(ii) a final order of the Texas Commission satisfactory to CSW and the Company to the effect
that the combination of the Company with CSW Sub contemplated under the Plan is in the
public interest and authorizing certain regulatory treatments with respect to the
combination; and
(iii) a final order of the Texas Commission satisfactory to CSW and the Company to the effect
that the repurchase by the Company of the previously leased Palo Verde Unit 2 and 3
assets and the ratemaking treatment for the repurchased assets as plant-in-service in rate
base at the net depreciated original book cost are in the public interest.
Rate Filing. The Company filed on January 10, 1994, for its fifth increase under the terms of the
Rate Moderation Plan ordered by the Texas Commission in Docket 7460, and a base rate increase
under the inventory plan for Palo Verde Unit 3 established in Docket 9945. See "Business
Regulation - Texas Rate Matters," below. The proposed rate changes represent what the Company
believes is supported under Texas law and prior Texas Commission orders, adjusted to reflect its
proposed acquisition by CSW. The filing is proceeding under Docket 12700.
The total amount of the Company's requested cash base rate increase, exclusive of fuel, in the
filing is approximately $41.4 million. The total increase consists of (i) a base rate increase of
$8.3 million, constituting the proposed 3.5 percent increase contemplated under the Rate Moderation
Plan for costs other than those associated with Palo Verde Unit 3; and (ii) a base rate increase of
$33.1 million, constituting the proposed increase under the inventory plan for Palo Verde Unit 3. As
discussed below, CSW has made a contemporaneous settlement offer that proposes rates lower than
those reflected in the Company's rate filing.
In the Docket 12700 proceeding, the Company has further proposed to reconcile its Texas fuel
costs and revenues for the period from April 1989 through June 1993 and to decrease its current
average fixed fuel factor. The proposed decrease in the average fixed fuel factor is anticipated to
decrease annual fuel revenues by approximately $14.3 million. As a result of the fuel reconciliation
and treatment of other fuel-related items, the Company has accrued in its financial statements and
proposes to refund to Texas jurisdictional customers (as a credit to fuel revenue collections)
approximately $16.4 million over a 12-month period. In addition, the Company proposes to recover
from Texas jurisdictional customers over a 12-month period a rate case expense surcharge ofapproximately $8.7 million. The net effect of the proposed changes, together with the requested rate
increases, would be an approximate $19.4 million increase in revenues from Texas jurisdictional
customers for the first 12-month period the changes are in effect.
The Company has not included in the rate filing a request to recover the costs of bankruptcy
reorganization or the $288.4 million from the draws on the letters of credit related to the Company's
sale and leasebacks of portions of its interest in Palo Verde, which draws occurred in late December
1991 and early January 1992. The Company has sought to reserve the ability to seek recovery of such
costs if the Plan does not become effective.
Texas Merger Application. In addition to the Company's rate filing, the Company and CSW filed
on January 10, 1994, a Joint Report and Application (the "Texas Merger Application") with the Texas
Commission requesting (i) a determination that the acquisition by CSW of one hundred percent of the
Company's common stock is consistent with the public interest; and (ii) certain determinations
regarding the regulatory treatment of the Company's proposed reacquisition of the portions of
Palo Verde that it previously sold and leased back.
As part of the Texas Merger Application and as a basis of settlement, CSW proposes rates for
Texas jurisdictional customers of the Company that are substantially less than those reflected in the
Company's rate case filing. The CSW settlement offer is contingent on the determination by the Texas
Commission that CSW's acquisition of the Company is consistent with the public interest and the
other regulatory determinations and approvals requested in the Texas Merger Application. The
proposed settlement offers (i) to limit the non-fuel base rate increase for Texas jurisdictional customers
to $25 million; (ii) a proposed $12.8 million reduction in fixed fuel factors; (iii) a refund of $16.4 million
over a 12-month period of over-recovered fuel costs and other fuel-related items; and (iv) a rate case
expense surcharge of $4.1 million related to previous rate cases to be collected over a 12-month period.
Taking into account the annual reduction in fuel costs and the proposed fuel refund, the Company's
revenues from Texas jurisdictional customers would not increase during the first year after the rate
change goes into effect. The settlement rate plan proposed by CSW also provides for (i) a freeze in the
effectiveness of any additional base rate increase until 1997; (ii) a limitation in the frequency of base
rate increases following the rate freeze period through 2001 to not more than once every other year
(i.e., 1997, 1999 and 2001); and (iii) a limitation on the amount of the 1997, 1999 and 2001 base rate
increases, such that each increase would not exceed eight percent of total revenues.
The Company expects the City of El Paso and some intervenors in Docket 12700 will contest both
the Merger and the proposed rate increase. However, at this time, the City of El Paso has taken no
official action in opposition to or support of the Merger or requested rate increase. The Company
anticipates the number of intervenors will be greater than in typical rate filing. SPS and other
Texas utilities have filed motions to intervene. The Company cannot predict at this time whether the
settlement proposal will be adopted by the Texas Commission as proposed or whether the Texas
Commission will enter the requested findings in connection with the Texas Merger Application. The
Texas Merger Application has been consolidated with Docket 12700. The presiding officers approved a
stipulation under which hearings in the consolidated proceeding will begin in late July 1994. The
Company will be entitled to increase its rates under bond in mid-July 1994, subject to refund
depending on the final outcome of the proceeding. The Company has not determined what level of
increase would be implemented under bond, should it choose to do so. The Company anticipates a final
order will be issued in Docket 12700 during the first half of 1995.
Proposed New Mexico Rate Path. The effectiveness of the Merger Agreement and, therefore, the
Plan and the Merger contemplated thereby are, unless waived by CSW and the Company, conditioned
on the receipt by the Company and/or CSW of the following New Mexico regulatory approvals and
determinations:
5
4(1)
a final order of the NMPUC satisfactory to the Company and CSW approving the
combination of the Company with CSW;
(ii)
a final order of the NMPUC satisfactory to the Company and CSW authorizing a base rate
increase for the Company of $6 million for the New Mexico jurisdiction to be effective as of
January 1, 1995, as contemplated by the rate plan set forth in an exhibit to the Plan, and
authorizing certain ratemaking, accounting and regulatory treatments of the assets,
expenditures, costs and revenues of the Company;
(iii) a final order of the NMPUC satisfactory to the Company and CSW authorizing the
issuance by the Company of the securities required for the consummation of the Plan;
(iv) a final determination by the NMPUC that none of the transactions between the Company
and CSW contemplated by either the Plan or Merger Agreement involve a Class II
transaction (which generally relate to certain investments or transactions with affiliates)
or, if the NMPUC determines that a Class II transaction is involved, a satisfactory final
order by the NMPUC approving a diversification plan relating to the combination of the
Company with CSW and the transactions between the Company and other CSW
subsidiaries which are conducted in the normal course of operations of the CSW System;
and
(v)
a final determination by the NMPUC that the Company does not require a new CCN as a
result of the transactions between the Company and CSW, as contemplated in either the
Plan or Merger Agreement, or, if the NMPUC determines that a new CCN is required for
the NMPUC, a satisfactory final order issuing a new CCN to the Company.
The Company and/or CSW, as appropriate, will file one or more joint applications seeking the
regulatory approvals described above. The Company and CSW filed an application (the "New Mexico
Merger Application") with the New Mexico Commission on March 14, 1994, which has been docketed
as NMPUC Case No. 2575. The New Mexico Merger Application requests the New Mexico
Commission, to the extent necessary and appropriate under the law, to approve (i) the acquisition by
CSW of the outstanding common stock of the Company; (ii) the accounting treatment of the Merger;
(iii) the reacquisition of portions of Palo Verde by the Company and the proposed accounting,
regulatory and tax treatment associated with the reacquisition; and (iv) a General Diversification
Plan for the Company for activities that will occur as a result of the Merger. Under New Mexico
Commission rules, a General Diversification Plan is required for certain transactions among a public
utility and its affiliates. As a result of the Merger, the Company would become affiliated with CSW
and its subsidiaries and affiliates. The New Mexico Merger Application does not include any requests
related to establishing different rates or related to the issuances of securities pursuant to the Plan;
such requests will be included in separate applications. While the Company believes that the
approvals and ratemaking, accounting and regulatory treatments being sought are in accordance with
the relevant provisions of New Mexico law and the NMPUC's rules, no assurances can be given that
the NMPUC will grant the approvals requested or make the determinations sought. While no
assurances can be given, the Company believes that the necessary New Mexico regulatory proceedings
can be completed within 18 months of filing the applications with the NMPUC.
NRC and Atomic Energy Act Issues. The Company holds NRC operating licenses in connection
with its ownership interests in Palo Verde. The operating license authorizes the Company to be a
participant in the facility. The Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (the "Atomic Energy Act"),
provides that such licenses or any rights thereunder may not be transferred or in any manner disposed
of, directly or indirectly, to any person through transfer of control unless the NRC finds that such
transfer is in accordance with the Atomic Energy Act and applicable NRC requirements and consents
to the transfer. On January 13, 1994, APS, as Operating Agent for Palo Verde, joined by the
Company, filed a request with the NRC (i) for consent to the indirect transfer of the Company's
6possession and ownership interest in the Operating Licenses for Palo Verde Units 1, 2, and 3 that
would occur as a result of the Merger; and (ii) to amend the Operating Licenses for Units 2 and 3 to
delete provisions of those licenses related to the Company's sale and leaseback transactions involving
those units. On March 2, 1994, the NRC published in the Federal Register its proposed determination
that the January 13, 1994 request "involve[d] no significant hazards consideration." The NRC has
proposed to determine that the requested amendment would not: (i) involve a significant increase in
the probability or consequences of an accident previously evaluated; (ii) create the possibility of a new
or different kind of accident from any previously evaluated; or (iii) involve a significant reduction in a
margin of safety.
Pursuant to standard NRC practice, on March 14, 1994, the NRC requested public comment on
the proposed transfer of control of ownership. In that Notice, the NRC also provided an opportunity for
comment on "whether significant changes in the licensees' activities have occurred since the
completion of the previous antitrust review." In that Notice, the NRC staff stated that "[t]he NRC will
consider the FERC proceeding to the maximum extent possible in resolving issues [of competitive
aspects] brought before the NRC." Pursuant to the NRC Notice, timely written comments have been
requested to be submitted to the NRC within 30 days of the Notice.
The request to the NRC specifies that the requested amendments to the Operating Licenses and
consent become effective on the Effective Date upon notification by the applicants that all necessary
regulatory approvals have been obtained, but the Company cannot predict at this time whether and
when the approvals and consent will be granted.
FERC and Federal Power Act Issues. Under the FPA, FERC regulates certain activities of
"public utilities," which includes the Company. The FPA requires the Company to obtain FERC
authority to sell, lease or otherwise dispose of its interstate transmission facilities, including a merger
that vests control in another person. Also, FERC approval of other transactions contemplated under
the Plan may be required including: (i) the issuance and sale by the Company of new securities; and
(ii) the amendment of the CSW System Operating Agreement to include the Company as a party.
The Company and CSW are seeking use of the transmission system of SPS, an electric utility
based in Amarillo, Texas, to coordinate the operations of the Company and the CSW Electric
Operating Companies. The Company has requested that SPS agree to provide the transmission
service and make the system modifications necessary to accomplish such coordination. On
November 4, 1993, the Company and Central and South West Services, Inc. ("CSWS"), as agent for the
CSW Electric Operating Companies, filed an application with the FERC under Sections 211 and 212 of
the FPA seeking an order of the FERC directed to SPS and requiring SPS to provide firm and non-firm
transmission services in connection with transfers of power between the control areas of PSO and the
Company in connection with the post-merger coordinated operations of the Company and the CSW
Electric Operating Companies, pursuant to the CSW System Operating Agreement. This
transmission service is sought as one means to meet the requirement of the PUHCA that the electric
utility operating subsidiaries of a registered holding company system be physically interconnected or
capable of physical interconnection and under normal operating conditions be economically operated
as a single interconnected and coordinated electric system. On December 22, 1993, SPS responded to
the application and requested that the application be dismissed or, in the alternative, be set for
hearing. In the December 22, 1993 response and subsequent pleadings, SPS argues that the requested
transmission services (i) would adversely affect SPS's system reliability and harm it and its native
customers, (ii) would be impermissibly anti-competitive and (iii) is beyond that which can be ordered
under the FPA, SPS also claims the Company and the CSW Electric Operating Companies failed to
make a good faith request for the transmission services as required by FERC regulations. The FPA
provisions authorizing such transmission requests were added in the Energy Policy Act and, as a
result, there is little precedent or guidance available with respect to their application.
7On January 10, 1994, as supplemented January 13, 1994, the Company and CSWS, on behalf of
the CSW Electric Operating Companies, filed a joint application with the FERC pursuant to Section
203 of the FPA requesting a determination by the FERC that the Merger and the resulting disposition
by the Company of indirect control over its jurisdictional facilities, consisting of the Company's
interstate transmission facilities, is consistent with the public interest. Twenty-nine parties have
filed motions to intervene or protests in the Section 203 filing. The Company and CSWS have
requested expedited consideration of the joint application, but the Company cannot predict at this time
when the FERC will issue its decision on the Joint Application.
Under the FPA, the FERC will approve a merger if it finds it to be "consistent with the public
interest." In making its public interest determination, the FERC typically applies six criteria:
(i) whether the proposed merger will have an adverse effect on the rates and operating costs of the
merging utilities and/or their surviving corporation; (ii) whether the merger will have a negative
impact on competition; (iii) whether the proposed accounting treatment is consistent with FERC
regulations; (iv) whether the purchase price is reasonable; (v) whether the acquiring utility has
coerced the acquired utility into accepting the merger; and (vi) whether the proposed merger will
impair effective regulation either by the FERC or the appropriate state and local regulatory
authorities.
CSWS also filed with the FERC on January 10, 1994, for approval under Section 205 of the FPA,
an agreement among the Company, CSWS and the CSW Electric Operating Companies to amend the
CSW System Operating Agreement and to make the Company a party to the CSW System Operating
Agreement.
No assurance can be given that the FERC will grant the required approvals under the FPA, when
such approvals might be granted, or upon what terms or conditions such approvals might be given. It
is a condition to the obligations of CSW, CSW Sub and the Company under the Merger Agreement that
a FERC order approving the Merger not contain conditions substantially more onerous than those in
recent FERC orders with respect to mergers involving electric utility companies.
SEC and PUHCA Issues. CSW is a public utility holding company as defined in the PUHCA and
is registered under such Act. CSW is required to obtain the approval of the SEC prior to
consummating the Merger. The SEC is directed to approve a proposed merger unless it finds that
(i) the acquisition would tend toward interlocking relations or a concentration of control of public
utility companies, of a kind or to an extent detrimental to the public interest or the interest of
investors or consumers; (ii) the consideration to be paid in connection with the acquisition is not
reasonable or does not bear a fair relation to the sums invested in or the earning capacity of the utility
assets underlying the securities to be acquired; or (iii) the acquisition would unduly complicate the
capital structure of the applicant's holding company system or would be detrimental to the public
interest or the interest of investors or consumers or the proper functioning of such holding company
system. To approve a proposed acquisition, the SEC must find that the acquisition would tend toward
the economical and efficient development of an integrated public utility system and would otherwise
conform to the PUHCA's integration and corporate simplification standards. The SEC also must find
that all state laws that apply to the Merger have been satisfied, unless it determines that compliance
with such state laws would be detrimental to the purposes of the PUHCA.
Under the PUHCA, the SEC must find that after the Merger the Company and CSW will
constitute an integrated electric system. As noted, the Company and CSW propose to coordinate their
operations by means of transmission service to be provided by SPS. In the past, the SEC has
determined that integration may be effected by means of transmission rights on unaffiliated systems.
SEC approval under the PUHCA will also be required for certain proposed transactions relating
to the Merger. SEC approval will be required for the formation of CSW Sub. In addition, SEC
approval (unless an exception is granted) will be required in connection with (i) the issuance of CSWcommon stock to the holders of the Company's common stock and certain creditors, and (ii) the
issuance of Reorganized EPE's securities to holders of the Company's securities and certain creditors
pursuant to the Plan.
CSW filed an Application-Declaration on Form U-1 (the "Application-Declaration") with the
SEC on January 10, 1994 pursuant to the PUHCA to seek authorization (i) of the merger of CSW Sub
with and into the Company and the acquisition of the Company by CSW through such merger; (ii) of
the issuance of securities by the Company and CSW in connection with the Plan and Merger and
certain related transactions; and (iii) to engage in certain hedging transactions, all as presented in the
Application-Declaration.
CSW has notified the Company of its intention to request a no-action letter from the SEC with
respect to the issuance of CSW common stock and Reorganized EPE preferred stock pursuant to the
Plan without registration under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and related matters.
Other Regulatory Filings. Under the FPA and the Department of Energy Act, the DOE must
authorize persons to transmit electric energy from the United States. The Company holds an
authorization to transmit electric energy to CFE. Under the Plan, CSW would become the owner of
the common stock of the Company. The DOE requires that notice of a succession of ownership be filed
with the DOE. In general, this notice must be filed at least 30 days prior to the effective date of any
succession in ownership. The Company intends to file a notice of succession in ownership with the
DOE at the appropriate time.
The Company also must file a notice related to the Merger with the FTC and DOJ pursuant to the
HSR Act. The applicable waiting period following such filing must have expired before the Effective
Date without an adverse ruling or other action by the FTC and DOJ with respect to any
anticompetitive effects of the Merger. The Company intends to file a notice pursuant to the HSR Act
at the appropriate time.
Treatment of Palo Verde
Major aspects of the Plan include (i) the rejection of the Company's leases relating to Palo Verde
(the "Palo Verde Leases"), which extend to the Company's entire interest in Palo Verde Unit 2,
approximately 40% of the Company's interest in Palo Verde Unit 3 and approximately one-third of its
interest in the Common Plant; (ii) the resolution of any and all claims relating to such leases by the
agreement that an amount equal to $700 million would be the allowed claim of holders of lease
obligation bonds related to the Palo Verde Leases and pursuant to settlement agreements entered into
between the Company, the Owner Trustee and each of the Owner Participants; (iii) reacquisition of
the leased portions of Palo Verde by the Company; and (iv) the Company's assumption of the ANPP
Participation Agreement and related agreements.
Adversary Proceeding. On September 9, 1992, the Company filed an adversary proceeding
against the lessors and the indenture trustees for the lease obligation bonds. The Company sought a
declaratory judgment that the Palo Verde Leases are leases of real property under the Bankruptcy
Code and, therefore, (i) the Palo Verde Leases were rejected pursuant to the Bankruptcy Code, and
(ii) the Company's liability for damages resulting from the rejection of the Palo Verde Leases would be
limited to approximately $273 million. In addition, the Company sought a declaratory judgment that
its liability for lease rejection would be fully satisfied by the proceeds of $288.4 million from draws on
letters of credit provided by the Company in connection with the Palo Verde Leases.
The defendants in the adversary proceeding asserted other claims against the Company,
including claims for prepetition rent, postpetition rent, and fees and expenses incurred in connection
with the Bankruptcy Case. In addition, the indenture trustees alleged that if the Palo Verde Leases
9
2are leases of real property under the Bankruptcy Code, then the purchasers of the lease obligation
bonds were defrauded by the Company,
On December 15, 1992, the Bankruptcy Court granted partial summary judgment against the
Company with respect to one issue on lease rejection damages, holding that the proceeds of the draws
on the letters of credit do not satisfy or offset the maximum claim allowable in the event the Palo
Verde Leases were determined to be real estate leases. Following the ruling, the Company suspended
solicitation on its Second Amended Plan of Reorganization and intensified its examination of
alternatives. The Company ultimately entered into the Merger Agreement with CSW on May 3, 1993.
On May 26, 1993, the Bankruptcy Court vacated the order of December 15, 1992, which left all issues
in the adversary proceeding open.
Treatment of Adversary Proceeding Under the Plan. The Plan sets forth a proposed resolution
pursuant to which the holders of bonds issued by two funding corporations would have allowed claims
of $700 million and such claims would be discharged by the issuance of securities in an amount equal
to 95.5% of the allowed claims. See "Treatment of Claims Under the Plan - Class 12-Claims Related
to Palo Verde Leases, Palo Verde Lease Obligation Bonds and Palo Verde Secured Lease Obligation
Bonds," below. The members of Class 12(a) accepted such proposal by voting in favor of the Plan.
The Plan also proposes a settlement of the claims by and against the Owner Participants
pursuant to settlement agreements. The Company has entered into a settlement agreement with each
of the Owner Participants and the Owner Trustee, which were approved by the Bankruptcy Court, but
such ettle ent agreements will not ecome effective unless and until the Plan becomes effective.
Pursuant to the settlement agreements, the Owner Participants would retain the $288.4 million of
proceeds from draws on the letters of credit. The Company and the Owner Participants would execute
mutual releases and the adversary proceeding would be dismissed with prejudice at the Effective Date.
In addition, any interest of the Owner Participants in Palo Verde would be transferred to the Company
at the Effective Date, so the Company would regain the ownership interest of the portions of Palo
Verde that were the subject of the Company's sale/leaseback transactions. Certain obligations of the
Company under the participation agreements in the sale/leaseback transactions, such as the
indemnification provisions, would survive pursuant to the terms of the settlement agreements.
Implications for Adversary Proceeding if Plan Does Not Become Effective. As a result of the vote
of the holders of Class 12(a) claims and the settlement agreements, the adversary proceeding would be
resolved by entry of an order dismissing the proceeding with prejudice. There would be no rulings on
the substantive issues in the proceeding. If the Plan does not become effective, no entry of the
dismissal order would occur. The Company would be faced with the alternatives of pursuing the
adversary proceeding or seeking some other resolution. If the Bankruptcy Court were to grant the
Company's motion for summary judgment, then the Palo Verde Leases would be deemed to be true
leases of real property under the Bankruptcy Code, and the leases would be deemed to have been
rejected on September 8, 1992, and the Company's liability for lease rejection damages would be
limited under the Bankruptcy Code to three years of the rent reserved under the leases. The Company
contends that this statutory amount is $273 million. Such amount would be offset by the
$288.4 million proceeds from the draws on the letters of credit if the Bankruptcy Court ruled in the
Company's favor. The defendants in the adversary proceeding contend that the statutory amount
should include other Palo Verde expenses, but they have not disclosed an amount thereof. The
defendants also contend that rejection of the leases would breach other contractual provisions and
warranties and give them the right to recover additional damages that are not subject to the statutory
limit. The amount of such alleged damages has not been specified, but the indenture trustees assert
that total damages may exceed the outstanding amount of lease obligation bonds ($698 million in
principal plus accrued interest).
If the Bankruptcy Court were to find that the Palo Verde Leases are true leases of personal
property under the Bankruptcy Code, then the leases would not be deemed to have been rejected on
10September 8, 1992. The Company could nevertheless seek to reject the leases pursuant to the
Bankruptcy Code, in which case the lessors could claim damages as provided in the leases. If the
Bankruptcy Court were to find that the Palo Verde Leases are not true leases under the Bankruptcy
Code, then the leases could not be rejected, and the indenture trustees may contend that the lease
obligation bonds should be treated as direct obligations of the Company. The Company cannot
quantify the monetary consequences to the Company under any of these scenarios.
ANPP Participation Agreement. The Company currently intends to assume the ANPP
Participation Agreement and other agreements related to the operation of Palo Verde and has entered
into a Cure and Assumption Agreement with the other Palo Verde Participants that was approved by
the Bankruptcy Court on November 19, 1993. Pursuant to the agreement, the ANPP Participation
Agreement and other operating agreements related to Palo Verde would be assumed by the Company
effective on the Effective Date. See "Facilities Palo Verde Station ANPP Participation
Agreement," below.
Treatment of Claims Under the Plan
The following is a description of each class of creditors and interest holders and a summary of the
treatment of such class under the Plan. Except as noted below, claims of secured creditors would be
paid in full, including post-petition interest, but with instruments that are likely to bear interest rates
that are lower than in existing arrangements. Unsecured claims generally would receive notes of
Reorganized EPE and/or CSW common stock equal to 95.5% of their allowed claims, and post-petition
interest beginning on the dates noted below through the Effective Date at 90-day LIBOR plus 200
basis points. Other classes of claims are unimpaired, including claims related to pollution control
revenue bonds, as noted. All members of a class would receive the treatment provided for the class,
regardless of whether the member voted in favor of the Plan.
Class 1 First Mortgage Bonds. Allowed claims arising from the Company's First Mortgage
Bonds (excluding bonds held as collateral to secure other debt of the Company) would be paid in full
through the issuance of Reorganized EPE First Mortgage Bonds (Series A and B) in the amount of the
principal of the First Mortgage Bonds and unpaid interest on such bonds. In addition, the unpaid
interest prior to July 1, 1992 on the First Mortgage Bonds would accrue interest at 90-day LIBOR plus
200 basis points from the due date of each installment of interest through the Effective Date. Such
interest on interest would be paid in cash at the Effective Date.
The Company has paid interest monthly on the First Mortgage Bonds at the contract non-default
rate from July 1, 1992 through the current date pursuant to applicable orders of the Bankruptcy Court
and intends to do so through the Effective Date.
Class 2 - Second Mortgage Bonds. Allowed claims arising from the Company's Second Mortgage
Bonds (excluding bonds held as collateral to secure other debt of the Company) would be paid in full
through the issuance of Reorganized EPE Second Mortgage Bonds in the amount of the principal
Second Mortgage Bonds and unpaid interest` prior to July 1, 1992 on such bonds. In addition, the
unpaid interest on the Second Mortgage Bonds would accrue interest at 90-day LIBOR plus 200 basis
points from the due date of each installment of interest through the Effective Date. Such interest on
interest would be paid in cash at the Effective Date.
The Company has paid interest monthly on the Second Mortgage Bonds at the contract
non-default rates from July 1, 1992 through the current date pursuant to applicable orders of the
Bankruptcy Court and intends to do so through the Effective Date.
Class 3 Revolving Credit Facility. Allowed claims arising from or related to the RCF, which are
secured by First Mortgage Bonds and Second Mortgage Bonds, would be discharged through the
issuance, in the amount of the outstanding principal balance of the RCF plus interest accrued through
11June 30, 1992, of either (a) Secured Notes of Reorganized EPE under a term loan agreement in the
amount of the claim secured by a combination of pledged Reorganized EPE First Mortgage Bonds and
Reorganized EPE Second Mortgage Bonds or (b) at the creditors' election, subject to certain
limitations, Reorganized EPE First Mortgage Bonds in an amount equal to one-third of the claims and
Reorganized EPE Second Mortgage Bonds in an amount equal to two-thirds of the claims. In addition,
interest on the unpaid interest would accrue at the contract non-default rate through the
Confirmation Date and would accrue at 90-day LIBOR plus 150 basis points from the Confirmation
Date through the Effective Date. Such interest on interest would be payable in cash on the Effective
Date.
The Company has paid interest monthly on the claims under the RCF from July 1, 1992 through
the current date pursuant to applicable orders of the Bankruptcy Court and anticipates it will
continue to do so through the Effective Date. If such interest is not paid, then interest would accrue on
the unpaid interest at higher contract default rates.
Class 4 Claims Under Three Series of Pollution Control Bonds. Class 4 consists of claims arising
under or related to three series of pollution control bonds that are secured by Second Mortgage Bonds.
These claims are considered unimpaired. The pollution control bonds would remain outstanding and
any claims would be unaltered by the Plan. It is contemplated that certain modifications to the
documents governing the bonds would be made after the Effective Date and the bonds remarketed or
refunded soon after the Effective Date.
Class 5 Claims Relating to the Letters of Credit Associated with the Three Series of Pollution
Control Bonds (Class 4). The issuers of letters of credit associated with the three series of secured
pollution control bonds have committed to provide replacement letters of credit on certain terms. The
issuers would receive Secured Notes from Reorganized EPE under term loan agreements, secured by
pledged Reorganized EPE Second Mortgage Bonds, with respect to outstanding draws on the existing
letters of credit and accrued interest on such unreimbursed draws through July 7, 1993. In addition,
interest on the certain amounts of unpaid interest and unreimbursed draws would accrue from July 8,
1993 through the Effective Date at rates related to contract rates, and would be paid in cash on the
Effective Date. Unpaid letter of credit fees also would be paid on the Effective Date.
Subsequent to the Confirmation Date, the Company has been reimbursing the issuing banks all
amounts drawn on the letters of credit for the payment of interest on the three series of pollution
control bonds whose claims are included in Class 4.
The reimbursement obligations under the replacement letters of credit (post-Effective Date)
would be secured by pledged Reorganized EPE Second Mortgage Bonds. If a letter of credit issuer does
not provide a replacement letter of credit, it would receive Reorganized EPE Second Mortgage Bonds
for claims the Bankruptcy Court determines are secured claims and Senior Fixed Rate Notes for
claims determined to be unsecured claims.
Class 6 - Claims Asserted by the Nuclear Fuel Trust. Class 6 consists of claims related to the trust
established for purposes of financing the purchase and enrichment of nuclear fuel for use by the
Company at Palo Verde. Holders of claims in Class 6 would receive, at the holder's election, either
(a) Secured Notes of Reorganized EPE secured by pledged Reorganized EPE Second Mortgage Bonds or
(b) Reorganized EPE Second Mortgage Bonds. In addition, an amount equal to 85% of the interest
accrued and unpaid through September 10, 1993 would be paid in cash at the Effective Date.
Interest on the principal amount of the claims of approximately $1.3 million accrued from
September 10, 1993 through the Confirmation Date and was paid at the Confirmation Date. From the
Confirmation Date to the Effective Date, interest will accrue on the principal amount of the claims at
90-day LIBOR plus 200 basis points and will be payable quarterly and at the Effective Date.
12Class 7-Other Allowed Secured Claims. These claims, which consist of any other secured claims,
are unimpaired and, at the option of the Company and CSW, would receive one of the following
treatments: (a) be paid in full in cash at the Effective Date; (b) be reinstated and remain unaltered by
the Plan; (c) have defaults cured and the obligation reinstated; or (d) receive the collateral.
Class 8 Allowed Priority Claims. The claims, which consist of allowed claims with priority
under certain provisions of the Bankruptcy Code, are unimpaired and such claims would be unaltered
by the Plan.
Class 9 Allowed Customer Refund and Deposit Claims. The claims, which are all allowed
claims by the Company's customers for refunds and deposits that are not Class 8 claims, would be
unimpaired and such claims would be unaltered by the Plan.
Class 10 Claims Under One Series of Pollution Control Bonds. Class 10 consists of claims
arising under agreements related to one series of pollution control bonds, which are not secured. The
claims are unimpaired and the pollution control bonds would remain outstanding and any claims
would be unaltered by the Plan. It is contemplated that certain modifications to the documents
governing the bonds would be made and the bonds remarketed or refunded soon after the Effective
Date.
•
Class 11 Claims Related to Letter of Credit Associated with the Series of Pollution Control Bonds
(Class 10). The issuer of the letter of credit has committed to provide a replacement letter of credit on
certain terms. The allowed claims of Class 11 would be the unreimbursed amounts drawn on the letter
of credit (with exceptions for amounts drawn to pay principal) and unpaid letter of credit fees. The
claims would be discharged by the issuance of Senior Notes of Reorganized EPE in a principal amount
equal to 30% of the allowed claims, CSW common stock equal to 60% of the allowed claims and, at the
election of Reorganized EPE, Senior Notes of Reorganized EPE or CSW common stock equal to 5.5% of
the allowed claims. In the event there is a draw on the existing letter of credit before the Effective
Date to pay the principal amount of the purchase price of any of the pollution control bonds that have
not been cancelled or extinguished, the claim would be discharged by Senior Floating Rate Notes
under a term loan agreement.
In addition, holders of Class 11 claims will accrue interest at 90-day LIBOR plus 200 basis points
on 95.5% of the principal amount of the claims from June 25, 1993 through the Effective Date (and on
100% of the amount of any letter of credit draw to pay the principal of any pollution control bonds).
Interest totaling approximately $101,000 through the Confirmation Date was paid at the
Confirmation Date. Interest will be paid quarterly thereafter and at the Effective Date.
Reimbursement obligations under the replacement letter of credit (post-Effective Date) would be
secured by pledged Reorganized EPE Second Mortgage Bonds. If the letter of credit issuer does not
provide a replacement letter of credit, allowed claims would be discharged through Senior Fixed Rate
Notes equal to one-third of the claims and CSW common stock equal to two-thirds of the claims.
Class 12 Claims Related to Palo Verde Leases, Palo Verde Lease Obligation Bonds and Palo
Verde Secured Lease Obligation Bonds. Class 12(a) consists of holders of Palo Verde Lease Obligation
Bonds and Secured Lease Obligation Bonds and the amount of allowed claims is stipulated to be
$700 million. The $700 million allowed claims would be discharged through the pro rata distribution
of the following securities in the amount of 95.5% of the allowed claims: Senior Notes of Reorganized
EPE in an amount not less than one-third and not more than two-thirds of the amount distributed for
such claims and the remainder in CSW common stock. Class 12 (b) consist of the Owner Participants,
who in addition to the Owner Trustee, have entered into settlement agreements with the Company.
The Owner Participants would transfer their interests in leased Palo Verde assets to the Company,
release their claims for any additional damage amounts under the Palo Verde Leases, retain
$288.4 million previously drawn on letters of credit, and be released from claims by the Company and
13be indemnified by the Company from claims of third parties, as provided in the settlement
agreements.
In addition, holders of Class 12(a) claims will accrue interest at 90-day LIBOR plus 200 basis
points on 95.5% of $700 million from July 29, 1993 through the Effective Date. Interest totaling
approximately $14.4 million through the Confirmation Date was paid at the Confirmation Date.
Interest will be payable quarterly thereafter and at the Effective Date. The amounts paid have been
offset against amounts accrued in connection with the Palo Verde Leases. See Part II, Item 7,
"Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation – Liquidity
and Capital Resources - Obligations Subject to Compromise - ANPP Participation Agreement."
-
Class 13 Unsecured Claims. Class 13 consists of general unsecured prepetition claims in excess
of $100,000, which would be discharged by the issuance of a combination of notes of Reorganized EPE
and CSW common stock as follows: Senior Notes in an amount equal to 30% of the claims, CSW
common stock equal to 60% of the claims, and, at the option of Reorganized EPE, Senior Notes or CSW
common stock equal to 5.5% of the claims.
In addition, holders of Class 13 claims will accrue interest at 90-day LIBOR plus 200 basis points
on 95.5% of the principal amount of their claims from June 25, 1993 through the Effective Date.
Interest totaling $8.2 million through the Confirmation Date was paid at the Confirmation Date.
Interest will be payable quarterly thereafter and at the Effective Date.
Class 14 Unsecured Claims Up to $100,000. General unsecured claims up to $100,000 are
unimpaired and would be paid in cash at the Effective Date.
Class 15 Preferred Stock Interests. See "Consideration to Shareholders Pursuant to the Plan
and Merger Agreement," below.
→
Class 16 Common Stock Interests. See "Consideration to Shareholders Pursuant to the Plan and
Merger Agreement," below.
Payment of Cash in Lieu of CSW Common Stock. The Plan provides for the issuance of CSW
common stock to holders of allowed claims in Classes 11, 12(a), 13 and, possibly, 15 to satisfy a
percentage of their allowed claims. Pursuant to the terms of the Plan, CSW could elect to pay holders
of allowed claims in such classes cash on the Effective Date in an amount equal to the value of some or
all of the CSW common stock that would have been distributed. If CSW elects to pay cash in lieu of
CSW common stock, it must be on a pro rata basis to the holders of allowed claims in Classes 11, 12(a)
and 13, and no holders of allowed Class 15 claims could receive cash in lieu of CSW common stock
unless cash had been paid in lieu of all CSW common stock that would have been distributed to holders
of allowed claims in Classes 11, 12(a) and 13.
Restrictions on the Transfer of CSW Common Stock Issued Pursuant to the Plan. The Plan
contains provisions that would restrict the transfer of CSW common stock issued under the Plan for a
period of time following the Effective Date. For shares of CSW common stock that would be issued to
holders of allowed claims in Classes 11, 12(a) and 13, there would be graduated lock-up periods such
that one-third of the shares of CSW common stock would be eligible to be transferred immediately,
two-thirds would be eligible for transfer after 90 days from the Effective Date and 100% would be
eligible for transfer after 180 days from the Effective Date. For shares of CSW common stock that
would be issued to holders of allowed Class 15 and Class 16 interests, no such shares would be eligible
for transfer until 240 days after the Effective Date. To enforce the restrictions, the Plan provides for
the delayed issuance or escrow of shares of CSW common stock through the applicable lock-up periods.
Holders of such shares would be compensated for the dividends that would have been paid on such
shares, either at the time of payment or at the end of the lock-up periods. Holders who would receive
14no more than 5,000 shares of CSW common stock in satisfaction of their allowed claims or interests as
of the Effective Date would be exempt from the restrictions on transfer.
Interim Distributions Under the Plan. As discussed above, the Plan required the Company to
make payments to certain classes of creditors at the Confirmation Date and thereafter until the
Effective Date of the Plan, or until further order of the Bankruptcy Court. These payments are in
addition to periodic interest payments on secured debt that the Company has been making since
July 1, 1992 pursuant to applicable orders of the Bankruptcy Court. The interim payments are
intended to compensate the holders of the claims during the period from the Confirmation Date to the
Effective Date. These interim payments consist of (i) amounts characterized as interest on unsecured
and undersecured debt and on the claims of the holders of the bonds related to the Palo Verde Leases;
(ii) amounts characterized as periodic payments to holders of the Company's preferred stock, which
the Bankruptcy Court has ruled are not dividends; and (iii) fees of professional advisors (including
attorneys) and other expenses of certain classes of creditors and interest holders. Pursuant to these
provisions of the Plan, at the Confirmation Date the Company paid a total of approximately
$24 million in interest and approximately $1.1 million to the holders of the Company's preferred stock
for the period to the Confirmation Date. In addition, the Company paid or has accrued a total of
approximately $13.3 million for fees and expenses, including fees of attorneys and financial advisors of
creditors and interest holders, incurred through the Confirmation Date, as provided under the terms of
the Plan. The Company estimates that interest payments and periodic payments aggregating
approximately $15.4 million per quarter will be made through the Effective Date of the Plan. These
estimates of interim payments do not include payments on secured debt of approximately $5 million
per month that the Company has been making.
Consideration to Shareholders Pursuant to the Plan and Merger Agreement
Common Stock. At the Effective Date, the issued and outstanding shares of Company common
stock (other than treasury shares and any shares held by CSW or CSW Sub) would be converted into
CSW common stock. Outstanding options to purchase common stock of the Company would be
converted into options to purchase shares of CSW common stock. The conversions would be based on
the ratio of the number of shares of CSW common stock credited to the CSW Common Stock
Acquisition Fund (which is defined in the Merger Agreement and is referred to herein as the "Fund")
to the number of outstanding shares of the Company's common stock at the Effective Date. The Fund
is a system for tracking the consideration that the Company's common shareholders would receive
through the Merger, including the additional consideration that can be achieved through the
Company's resolution of certain matters, such as the settlement of certain claims and the realization of
certain assets. The maximum amount of additional consideration that can be obtained is $1.50 per
share of the Company's common stock outstanding on the Confirmation Date, or approximately
$53.3 million (the "Maximum Consideration Amount"). No shares of CSW common stock or cash
actually are placed in the Fund. The Fund was created on the Confirmation Date and, on that date, a
total of 3,699,573 shares of CSW common stock were credited to the Fund, based on (i) a value of $3.00
per share of the Company's common stock, (ii) 35,544,330 shares of Company common stock
outstanding on the Confirmation Date, (iii) an average trading price of $29.4583 for CSW common
stock, and (iv) the realization prior to the Confirmation Date of approximately $2.3 million in
additional consideration through the resolution of certain litigation. As items specified in the Merger
Agreement in connection with the additional consideration are resolved, additional shares of CSW
common stock will be credited to the Fund. Pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement, the
number of additional shares will be determined based on the amount realized, the date of resolution of
the item and the closing price of CSW common stock on such date. Pursuant to the Second
Amendment to the Merger Agreement, as a result of the proposed settlements with the Owner
Participants in the Palo Verde sale/leaseback transactions and APS on certain claims, an additional
amount of up to $13.8 million will be added to the additional consideration one day prior to the
Effective Date, if and to the extent the Maximum Consideration Amount has not been reached.
15In June 1993, the Company acquired all of the outstanding stock of Triangle Electric Supply
Company, Inc. ("Triangle Electric") as a result of the settlement of certain litigation. On March 22,
1994, the Bankruptcy Court entered an order approving the sale by Triangle Electric of substantially
all of its assets (excluding cash and cash equivalents) at net book value, subject to certain adjustments,
plus $1,550,000 for a covenant not to compete. The Company has filed a notice with the New Mexico
Commission seeking prior approval of the disposition. The Company estimates that, upon the closing
of the transaction, approximately $10 million of additional consideration will be credited to the Fund.
Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, additional shares of CSW common stock would be credited to the
Fund based on the amount of additional consideration ultimately realized and the closing price of CSW
common stock on the date the matter is resolved.
The Company also has filed a motion with the Bankruptcy Court seeking approval of a
settlement with the IRS related to their claim against the Company for prepetition tax years. If
approved, the settlement would result in the resolution of the IRS's proof of claim for approximately
$6.2 million. Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, the settlement would generate approximately
$27.8 million of additional consideration (the difference between $34.0 million and the $6.2 million
proposed settlement with the IRS). The Merger Agreement provides that additional shares of CSW
common stock would be credited to the Fund based on the $27.8 million of additional consideration and
the closing price of CSW common stock on the date of resolution. See Item 3, "Legal Proceedings - Tax
Matters - Federal Tax Matters." If the Company realizes the additional consideration as discussed
above, the Maximum Consideration Amount would be achieved for the common shareholders. The
Company will continue to resolve all matters that can result in additional consideration.
In addition to the shares credited to the Fund in connection with the Maximum Consideration
Amount, as described above, shares of CSW common stock will be credited to the Fund through the
Effective Date based on the aggregate dividends that would have been paid on the shares of CSW
common stock credited to the Fund. The number and timing of shares of CSW common stock credited
for dividends will be determined as provided in the Merger Agreement, and is based on the closing
price of CSW common stock on the dividend payment date and the number of shares credited to the
Fund on the ex-dividend date for payment of CSW dividends. As of March 15, 1994, 3,757,009 shares
of CSW common stock have been credited to the Fund, including 57,436 shares of CSW common stock
based on payments of dividends on CSW common stock. CSW common stock is traded on the
New York Stock Exchange, symbol CSR. The closing price for CSW common stock on March 15, 1994
was $26.00 per share.
If the Maximum Consideration Amount described above has not been realized, then as of the
Effective Date the Company would establish a liquidation trust (the "Liquidation Trust"), assign
thereto all of the Company's rights to and interests in certain contingent items described in the
Merger Agreement which are not disposed of or determined prior to the Effective Date, and advance to
the Liquidation Trust cash (not to exceed $1,000,000) for expenses of the trustee of the Liquidation
Trust. Any cash proceeds in the Liquidation Trust (after payment of expenses related to the operation
of the Liquidation Trust) resulting from dispositions of the assets or from such reductions in claims
determined after the effective date would be distributed pro rata to the holders, as of the Effective
Date, of the Company's common stock until the Maximum Consideration Amount has been reached
and then would be returned to the Company.
If another plan of reorganization involving CSW or an affiliate of CSW were to become effective,
then pursuant to terms of the Merger Agreement, unless the Company has withdrawn the Plan or
proposed a stand-alone plan of reorganization inconsistent with the Merger Agreement or has
breached the Merger Agreement in a material manner, CSW would be required to pay to holders of the
Company's common stock an amount equal to the difference between the aggregate amount that
would have been paid to such holders under the Plan and the amount actually paid under the other
plan of reorganization (the "Price Protection").
16Preferred Stock. Pursuant to the Plan, the allowed interests of preferred shareholders would be
the sum of (a) the aggregate amount of the redemption prices on the Effective Date of the preferred
stock and (b) the aggregate amount of dividends accrued and unpaid prior to the bankruptcy filing on
January 8, 1992 (two quarters of dividends). These interests would be satisfied under the Plan by the
issuance of securities having a value in the amount of $68 million. Under the Plan, the Company's
preferred stock would be converted to either (a) shares of Reorganized EPE Preferred Stock or (b) if
CSW so elects before December 8, 1994, a combination of shares of Reorganized EPE Preferred Stock
and CSW common stock,
In addition, periodic payments will accrue from August 20, 1993 to the Effective Date at the rate
of 90-day LIBOR plus 200 basis points on the amount of the preferred stock distribution amount.
Payments totaling $1.4 million were made through December 31, 1993.
Termination of Merger Agreement
CSW has the right to terminate the Merger Agreement if certain events, including but not
limited to the following, occur:
(i) the Company withdraws or modifies in a manner adverse to CSW its recommendation or
approval of the Plan, the Merger Agreement or the Merger, or approves or recommends a
proposal or acquisition with a party other than CSW or a subsidiary of CSW;
occur:
(ii)
a material breach of any representation, warranty, covenant or agreement of the Merger
Agreement by the Company;
(iii) failure to obtain any required statutory approvals or regulatory determinations that are
conditions to the effectiveness of the Merger or the inability to satisfy any other conditions
to the effectiveness of the Plan and Merger; or
(iv) the Company files an independent case related to rates before the Texas Commission,
except as permitted by the Merger Agreement.
The Company has the right to terminate the Merger Agreement if any of the following events
failure to obtain any required statutory approvals or regulatory determinations that are
conditions to the effectiveness of the Plan and Merger;
(ii) material breach of any representation, warranty, covenant or agreement of the Merger
Agreement by CSW;
(iii) CSW withdraws or modifies in a manner adverse to the Company its recommendation or
approval of the Plan, the Merger Agreement or the Merger; or
(iv) the Company determines in accordance with its fiduciary duties as debtor-in-possession to
engage in an acquisition transaction with a party unrelated to CSW.
Either party may terminate the Merger Agreement if (i) the Effective Date has not occurred
within 18 months (or, if extended by the parties, within 24 months) of the Confirmation Date; or
(ii) prior to the Effective Date the Plan is terminated or the confirmation order is vacated or reversed.
In the event the Merger Agreement is terminated, it shall become void and, other than (i) the
possible payment of a termination fee, by the Company or CSW to the other party; (ii) the possible
payment of the Price Protection; and (iii) under certain circumstances, the reimbursement to the
17Company by CSW of certain costs, interest and expenses related to the Merger borne by the Company,
there is no other obligation or liability on the part of the Company, CSW or CSW Sub. Termination
fees of $25 or $50 million (in the case of any payments due from the Company to CSW) or $25 million
(in the case of any payment due from CSW to the Company) are payable only in limited circumstances.
The amount of the termination fee payable by the Company, if any, depends on the reason for
termination.
Actions Related to Bankruptcy Case Prior to the Effective Date
Prior to the Effective Date, current management of the Company will continue to manage and
run the
pany, subject to the oversight of the Board of Directors and required approvals of the
Bankruptcy Court for certain actions. Under the Merger Agreement, the Company is prohibited from
undertaking certain actions, which generally are extraordinary in nature; may be required to notify or
obtain the approval of CSW prior to undertaking other actions; and its ability to take certain actions is
limited in other respects. With those limitations, the Company is continuing to operate and complete
the actions required to reach the Effective Date.
Interim payments will be made prior to and at the Effective Date, as set forth in the Plan, and as
described above in "Treatment of Claims Under the Plan." The Company and CSW continue to meet
periodically with an oversight committee representing all classes of creditors to inform them of the
status of the conditions to effectiveness of the Plan and to provide other information.
The Company is continuing its analysis of its executory contracts to determine whether the
Company should assume or reject all or a portion of these contracts. The Company has motions
pending to assume (i) the lease related to the Company's sale and leaseback transaction involving
generation equipment at the Copper Power Station (the "Copper Lease"), to the extent the Copper
Lease may in any respect be an unexpired lease of non-residential real property; and (ii) the lease, as
amended, with the Navajo Nation in connection with the construction and operation of the
Four Corners Project (the "Navajo Lease"). For a description of the Copper Power Station and
Four Corners Project, see "Facilities - Copper Power Station" and "Facilities - Four Corners Project."
The Company also is continuing its analysis of the proofs of claim filed in the Bankruptcy Case in
an effort to reconcile the claimants and the claimed amounts with the Company's books and records
and, prior to the Effective Date, will determine which it will object to. The general deadline for filing
creditors' claims against the Company with the Bankruptcy Court was June 15, 1992. Approximately
500 proofs of claim or interest had been filed with the Bankruptcy Court as of December 31, 1993.
Many of the proofs of claim are voluminous and duplicative. The Company's counsel is also involved in
the process of analyzing the factual and legal bases of many of the proofs of claim.
Based on the evaluation to date, the following table represents the proofs of claims, exclusive of
proofs of claims that have been withdrawn voluntarily or for which objections by the Company have
been upheld and those for which amounts have been paid, as of December 31, 1993, that have been
filed and that include a specified amount.
Category of Claims
Claims that correspond to Company books and records
Palo Verde lease obligation bond claims
Litigation claims
Tax claims
Executory contract claims
Other
Subtotal
Claims that are duplicative of the above
Total
18
Amount
(In thousands)
$ 1,220,095
743,082
50,111
54,182
11,019
19,748
2,098,237
3,284,517
$ 5,382,754The Company does not acknowledge the validity of any proofs of claim represented in the table
and reserves its right to object to all proofs of claim. Claims related to the Palo Verde lease obligation
bonds are unliquidated claims that are included in Class 12 under the Plan and would be allowed
claims in the amount of $700 million under the Plan. Tax claims represent unliquidated amounts
related primarily to asserted tax deficiencies in federal income taxes, as discussed in Item 3, "Legal
Proceedings - Tax Matters - Federal Tax Matters." Litigation claims primarily reflect miscellaneous
personal injury litigation for which the Company has adequate liability insurance and commercial
litigation. The Company believes that the duplicate claims will not be allowed claims in the
Bankruptcy Case. The claims for executory contracts are for unliquidated damages for leases or other
executory contracts the Company has not rejected. There also are approximately 70 proofs of claims
that do not specify an amount and, therefore, are not reflected in the table above. The Company
cannot predict the amount of claims that ultimately will be allowed by the Bankruptcy Court in the
Bankruptcy Case.
Alternatives to the Plan
If the Plan does not become effective, the Company would consider other alternatives to the
Merger, including another merger or business combination with an entity not affiliated with CSW, a
stand-alone plan that would involve a restructuring under FERC jurisdiction or a stand-alone plan
under existing regulatory frameworks. Under each of these alternatives, the treatment of Palo Verde
and the pending adversary proceeding would present a major consideration.
The restructuring under FERC jurisdiction would result in a conversion of the Company into a
holding company with integrated multiple corporate subsidiaries that would be subject to increased
FERC regulation and, possibly, SEC regulation under the PUHCA. Operating subsidiaries would
perform the electric generating operations of the Company, the operation of transmission facilities, its
retail electric distribution operations in Texas, its retail electric distribution operations in
New Mexico, and its general and administrative functions such as engineering, accounting,
management and similar services.
It is also possible that the Bankruptcy Court would allow a third party to file a plan of
reorganization that may involve a merger, business combination or acquisition.
Any plan of reorganization other than the Plan may provide for different securities and
treatments than those provided in the Plan, and could result in lower recoveries for creditors and
interest holders and/or could require larger rate increases than proposed pursuant to the Plan. The
Company cannot predict (i) what the treatment of claims and interests would be under any alternate
plan of reorganization, (ii) in what respects actions proposed under the Plan would be modified, or
(iii) the amount of time that would be involved before any such alternate plan of reorganization were
effective.
Although the Company believes it is unlikely, and the Bankruptcy Court has indicated it would
be an undesirable outcome, if no other plan of reorganization proves viable, the Bankruptcy Court also
could order the liquidation of the Company.
Overview
Regulation
Effect of Bankruptcy on Regulation. The Bankruptcy Code provides that the Bankruptcy Court
shall confirm the Company's plan of reorganization only if "any governmental regulatory commission
with jurisdiction, after confirmation of the plan, over the rates of the debtor has approved any rate
change provided for in the plan, or such rate change is expressly conditioned on such approval." To
date, the Company has not asserted arguments in the regulatory proceedings that the provisions of the
19Bankruptcy Code, together with applicable provisions of other federal statutes, grant the Bankruptcy
Court the authority to preempt otherwise applicable regulatory authority and processes, and it is
uncertain whether the Company would prevail on such arguments, if asserted. As discussed above, in
"Bankruptcy Proceedings for Reorganization of the Company - Regulatory Aspects of the Plan and
Merger," the Company or, where appropriate, CSW or APS, have filed or will file applications with
various regulatory bodies to seek approvals or findings necessary to consummate the Merger and
otherwise satisfy the conditions to the effectiveness of the Plan. The discussion of the applications
filed or to be filed before the regulatory bodies pursuant to the Plan and the pending regulatory
appeals discussed below in "Texas Rate Matters" and "New Mexico Rate Matters" should be read in
the context of the preemption issue discussed above.
On June 11, 1992, an agreed order was entered in the Bankruptcy Court pursuant to which
appeals in Dockets 7460, 8588, and 9165 (discussed below in "Texas Rate Matters") may go forward in
state court and, upon remand, before the Texas Commission. The agreed order provided that it was
not a determination of the applicability of the automatic stay in bankruptcy as to any other regulatory
appeal or a determination of the jurisdiction of the Bankruptcy Court or any other court or regulatory
authority with respect to the Company's rates or service. On September 20, 1993, the Bankruptcy
Court entered an order lifting the automatic stay in the appeals of the Company's other Texas rate
proceedings, consisting of Dockets 9945, 8018, 8078, 8363, and 9069 (discussed below in "Texas Rate
Matters").
Texas. The rates and services of the Company in Texas municipalities are regulated by those
municipalities and in unincorporated areas by the Texas Commission. largest municipality in the
Company's service area in Texas is the City of El Paso. The Texas Commission has exclusive de novo
appellate jurisdiction to review municipal orders and ordinances regarding rates and services, and its
decisions are subject to judicial review.
The Texas Commission has jurisdiction to grant and amend CCNs for service territory and
certain facilities, including generation and transmission facilities. Although the Texas Commission
does not have the authority to approve transfers of utility assets, it is required to evaluate certain
transfers of utility assets and mergers and consolidations of regulated utility companies to determine
if those transactions are consistent with the public interest. Upon a finding that such a transaction is
not in the public interest, the Texas Commission is required to consider the effects of the transaction in
future ratemaking proceedings and is required to disallow the effects of the transaction if it will
unreasonably affect rates or service.
New Mexico. The New Mexico Commission has jurisdiction over the Company's rates and
services in New Mexico. The New Mexico Commission must grant prior approval of the issuance,
assumption or guarantee of securities; the creation of liens on property located within the state; the
consolidation, merger or acquisition of some or all of the stock of another utility, and the sale, lease,
rental, purchase or acquisition of any public utility plant or property constituting all or part of an
operating unit or system. The New Mexico Commission also has jurisdiction as to the valuation of
utility property and business; certain extensions, improvements and additions; Class I and II
transactions (as defined by the New Mexico Public Utility Act); abandonment of facilities and the
certification and decertification of utility plant.
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. The Company is subject to regulation by the FERC in
certain matters, including rates for wholesale power sales and the issuance of securities. In 1992, the
Congress enacted the Energy Policy Act, which, among other things, removes certain restrictions on
utility participation in the competitive wholesale generation market. In addition, subject to certain
limitations, the legislation provides that the FERC also may order electric utilities, including the
Company, to provide certain transmission services. The legislation also expands the authority of state
utility commissions to examine the books and records of electric utilities. See "Bankruptcy
20Proceedings for Reorganization of the Company Regulatory Aspects of the Plan and Merger,"
above.
Nuclear Regulatory Commission. The Palo Verde Station is subject to the jurisdiction of the
NRC, which has authority to issue permits and licenses, to regulate nuclear facilities in order to
protect the health and safety of the public from radiation hazards and to conduct environmental
reviews pursuant to the National Environmental Policy Act. Before any nuclear power plant can
become operational, an operating license from the NRC is required. The NRC has granted facility
operating licenses for Unit 1, Unit 2 and Unit 3 at Palo Verde for terms of forty years each, beginning
December 31, 1984, December 9, 1985 and March 25, 1987, respectively. Full power operating licenses
for Units 1, 2 and 3 were issued by the NRC in June 1985, April 1986 and November 1987,
respectively. In addition, the Company (along with the other Palo Verde Participants other than APS)
is separately licensed by the NRC to own its proportionate share thereof. See "Facilities - Palo Verde
Station." On January 13, 1994, APS, as Operating Agent of Palo Verde, joined by the Company, filed a
request with the NRC (i) for consent to the indirect transfer of the Company's possession and
ownership in the Operating Licenses for Palo Verde Units 1, 2 and 3 that will occur as a result of the
merger of a special-purpose subsidiary of CSW with and into the Company, and (ii) to amend the
Operating Licenses for Units 2 and 3 to delete provisions of those licenses related to the Company's
sale and leaseback transactions involving those units. The request to the NRC specifies that the
requested amendments to the Operating Licenses and consent become effective on the Effective Date,
upon notification by the applicants that all necessary regulatory approvals have been obtained, but
the Company cannot predict at this time whether and when the approvals and consent will be granted.
See "Bankruptcy Proceedings for Reorganization of the Company - Regulatory Aspects of the Plan
and Merger," above.
Accounting for the Effects of Regulation. Prior to December 31, 1991, the financial statements of
the Company were prepared pursuant to the provisions of SFAS No. 71, as amended, "Accounting for
the Effects of Certain Types of Regulation," which provides for the recognition of the economic effects
of regulation. In early 1992, the Company determined that there existed substantial doubt concerning
whether the criteria for reflecting the economic effects of regulation continued to be met as a result of
continuing cash flow problems arising from inadequate rate relief and the uncertainty surrounding
regulation during the reorganization process, including the regulatory treatment, if any, of the
$288.4 million letters of credit draws. The Company concluded that it was not reasonable to assume
that its rates were, or will be, without giving consideration to possible outcomes of the reorganization
process, designed to recover its costs on a timely basis. Because of uncertainty of the nature of any
reorganization plan ultimately consummated and the assessment of the nature of regulation, the
Company concluded that it did not then and does not currently have sufficient assurance to reflect the
economic effects of regulation in its general purpose financial statements. Therefore, as required by
generally accepted accounting principles, the Company eliminated from its 1991 balance sheet the
aggregate effects of regulation, which resulted in a $311 million extraordinary charge to results of
operations for the year ended December 31, 1991. This amount included approximately $200 million
of operating expenses primarily related to Palo Verde and approximately $80 million of income taxes
related to the Palo Verde sale/leaseback transactions which had been deferred by the Company's
regulators for recovery in future periods. Furthermore, the Company did not record the letter of credit
draws amounting to $288.4 million as an asset and has not recorded any new assets reflecting the
economic effects of regulation since 1991 in its general purpose financial statements.
Although the outcome of the reorganization process cannot presently be determined, the
Company believes that the rates established in conjunction with any reorganization plan will be
designed to recover the Company's costs, including a return on equity, after the establishment of an
appropriate capital structure, as well as to reflect other changes that may result from the
reorganization. The Company expects that, upon effectiveness of any plan of reorganization, its
regulated operations will meet the SFAS No. 71 criteria necessary to reflect the effects of regulation in
its general purpose financial statements. Such rates may include the recovery of some or all items
21that, at that time, are not reflected as regulatory assets on the Company's general purpose financial
statements. However, in the absence of application of purchase accounting applied in the event of a
change in control occurring as part of the reorganization, there does not appear to be any applicable
accounting precedent for the restoration of such amounts as assets created prior to the re-adoption of
SFAS No. 71. Restoration of such amounts as assets will depend upon a number of factors, including
intervening developments in accounting standards and other accounting literature, the outcome of
which cannot currently be determined. In March 1993, the Financial Accounting Standards Board's
Emerging Issues Task Force reached a consensus that if a rate-regulated enterprise initially fails to
meet the regulatory asset recognition requirements of SFAS No. 71, but meets those requirements in a
subsequent period, then regulatory assets should be recognized in the period the requirements are
met. Although the Emerging Issues Task Force's consensus applied to rate-regulated enterprises
currently meeting the requirements of SFAS No. 71, the Company believes that this consensus
supports the Company's position regarding restoring previous net regulatory assets in its general
purpose financial statements. In the event it is concluded that such restoration is not appropriate
under generally accepted accounting principles, the Company would be precluded from recognizing
historical amounts as regulatory assets in its general purpose financial statements. If it is determined
that such restoration is appropriate, regulatory assets would be recorded to the extent items allowed to
be recovered in the rate making process have not been reflected as assets in the Company's general
purpose financial statements.
Texas Rate Matters
Rate Moderation Plan - Palo Verde Units 1 and 2. In 1988 the Texas Commission established a
rate moderation plan in Docket 7460 based on a contested stipulation, pursuant to which the Texas
jurisdictional portion of the Company's investment in Palo Verde Unit 1, Common Plant, and lease
payments on Unit 2 (to the extent of approximately 83% of those lease payments) were to be phased-in
to rates in four steps. The order in Docket 7460 also settled all issues concerning the prudence of the
Company's initial decision to participate in Palo Verde and all issues concerning prudence in the
construction of Units 1 and 2. (The prudence of the Company's decision to continue its investment in
Unit 3 after 1978 and the prudence in the construction of Unit 3 were the subject of Docket 9945,
discussed below.) The Docket 7460 order was upheld by the Texas Court of Appeals for the
3rd Judicial District at Austin, Texas (the "Court of Appeals"), on August 26, 1992, except for a
determination that deferred carrying costs may not be included in rate base. The case has been
appealed to the Texas Supreme Court by the Company and other parties. See discussion below under
"Deferred Accounting Cases."
The first base rate increase contemplated under the rate moderation plan was ordered in
Docket 7460, and the remaining three increases were sought and ordered in subsequent rate filings
(Dockets 8363, 9165, and 9945). As a result of these filings, the Texas Commission has allowed
periodic rate increases which allow the Company to recover some, but not all, of its revenue
requirements associated with its investment in Units 1 and 2 (as established in these rate cases), and
the Company has been permitted to defer those unrecovered revenue requirements on its regulatory
books of account for collection in later years. In Docket 9945, the Texas Commission limited each
future base rate increase intended to recover those deferrals to 3.5%. In connection with the
Company's discontinuation of reporting under SFAS No. 71 as of December 31, 1991, approximately
$46.1 million of "phase-in deferrals" previously recorded pursuant to this plan have been eliminated
from the Company's general purpose financial statements and reported as part of the extraordinary
charge to results of operations for the year ended December 31, 1991.
Dockets 8363 and 9165 have been appealed to the Texas District Court, where the appeals
remain pending. A hearing on the appeal of Docket 8363 has been scheduled for July 1994. No
hearing on the appeal of Docket 9165 has been scheduled. The outcome of these appeals and the
results or materiality of final dispositions of these cases presently cannot be determined.
22Docket 9945. On December 28, 1990, the Company filed with the Texas Commission a combined
request for the scheduled fourth base rate increase under the Docket 7460 rate moderation plan
discussed above and for the recovery, also on a moderated basis, of the Texas jurisdictional portion of
the Company's investment in Palo Verde Unit 3, including the lease payments, net of deferred gain, on
the Company's sales and leasebacks of a portion of its interest in Unit 3. The Company's combined
request was for $131.3 million, which included approximately $49 million related to the Units 1 and 2
rate moderation plan and approximately $82.3 million related to Unit 3. Of the total request,
approximately $38 million was to be in cash with the balance deferred for subsequent recovery.
The Texas Commission issued its final order in Docket 9945 on November 12, 1991, approving a
total increase in Texas base revenues of approximately $47 million, consisting of $37 million in cash
and $10 million of phase-in deferrals. The order approved a cash increase of approximately $7 million
as the fourth increase under the Units 1 and 2 rate moderation plan with a phase-in deferral of
$10 million for future recovery in rates. The order limited each future increase in base rates under the
Units 1 and 2 plan to 3.5%, but also approved a regulatory non-cash revenue adjustment recommended
by the Hearing Examiners, which was necessary to provide for full recovery of the phase-in deferrals
during the remaining term of the Units 1 and 2 rate moderation plan. The balance of the $37 million
cash increase (approximately $30 million) represented operating and maintenance expenses,
decommissioning expenses and ad valorem taxes on Unit 3 of Palo Verde, as well as an allowance for
purchased power capacity. The balance did not include any current return of or return on the owned
portion of Unit 3 or recovery of the lease expenses related to Unit 3. Recovery of these costs has been
held in abeyance to be included subsequently in Texas rates over a scheduled period of time, as
discussed below.
The Texas Commission disallowed approximately $32 million of Unit 3 capitalized costs, on a
total Company basis, as imprudently incurred. The order also disallowed $9.8 million, on a total
Company basis, of previously deferred costs related to the 1989-90 outages of Units 1 and 2. The
Company recorded pre-tax write-offs of $24.1 million and $6.3 million, respectively (the Texas
jurisdictional amounts of these disallowances), in results of operations in the third quarter of 1991.
With respect to the rate treatment of Unit 3, the Texas Commission adopted an inventory plan,
pursuant to which the Company's investment in Unit 3 was neither included in rates nor expressly
disallowed, but instead held in abeyance to be included subsequently in Texas rates over a scheduled
period of time. In justifying the inventory plan, the Texas Commission found (i) the Company was
imprudent in not attempting to sell a portion of its interest in Palo Verde between 1978 and 1981;
(ii) the Company failed to demonstrate that it would not have been unable to sell such interest if it had
attempted to do so; and (iii) as a result of such imprudent action, the addition of Unit 3 to the
Company's system would result in excess capacity. However, the Texas Commission further found
that Unit 3 would become "used and useful" to the Texas jurisdiction in the following percentages: 0%
(in Docket 9945), and 40%, 65%, 85% and 100% thereafter. It is the Company's position that the
successive phases of the inventory plan were to be implemented on an annual basis; however, other
parties may contest that position. Other parties also may contest whether the inventory plan
constituted a proper determination by the Texas Commission of when Unit 3 would become used and
useful. During the period Unit 3 is held in inventory, the Company will recover the operating and
maintenance expenses, decommissioning expenses and ad valorem taxes associated with Unit 3, along
with an allowance for purchased power capacity. Pursuant to the order, but subject to possible
changes that could result from an effective reorganization plan, the Company expects to recover, in
future years, the following at the applicable inventoried percentages: a return of and on the plant
costs associated with the owned portions of Unit 3 and the amount of lease payments due under the
sale and leaseback transactions the Company entered into in connection with Unit 3. Under the order,
the Company will retain the benefits of its sales to CFE for at least the period covered by the first rate
order under the inventory plan. For a discussion of the sales to CFE, see Part II, Item 7,
"Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Results of
Operations."
23The Company disputes there was any imprudence, either in connection with the Unit 3
capitalized costs or in retaining its full investment in Palo Verde. The Company challenged both
aspects of the Texas Commission's order in the Company's Motions for Rehearing and has continued
such challenges on appeal. The Company filed an appeal with the Texas District Court on April 21,
1992. The City of El Paso and two intervenors also appealed. On October 27, 1993, the Texas District
Court affirmed the final order of the Texas Commission except in two respects. The Texas District
Court held the Texas Commission erred (i) by refusing to include certain disallowed utility expenses as
deductions when computing federal income tax expense for ratemaking purposes and (ii) by granting
rate base treatment for post-in-service deferred carrying costs associated with Palo Verde. The second
holding is consistent with the decision of the Texas Court of Appeals in Docket 7460, discussed below
under "Deferred Accounting Cases." The Company has appealed the decision, as have the City of
El Paso and the two intervenors who were parties to the appeal before the Texas District Court. The
ultimate outcome of the appeals and their results or the materiality thereof cannot be predicted at this
time.
Deferred Accounting Cases. The Company has received a series of orders authorizing the deferral
of operating costs incurred, and carrying charges accrued, on each unit of Palo Verde between the
unit's in-service date and the date of its inclusion in Texas rates. Certain orders have also permitted
the Company to include in rate base and amortize the deferred costs over the lives of Units 1 and 2
(approximately 40 years for ratemaking purposes). All of these "deferred accounting orders" have
been appealed. The ultimate outcome of these appeals and their results or the materiality thereof
cannot be predicted by the Company at this time.
The deferred accounting order in Docket 7460 (regarding Units 1 and 2) has been the subject of
two rulings by the Court of Appeals and is currently pending before the Texas Supreme Court. In its
first ruling on August 14, 1991, the Court of Appeals held that none of the deferred costs could be
included in rate base. As a result of that ruling, the Company discontinued deferring for financial
reporting purposes Unit 3 operating and maintenance expenses and related carrying costs as of July 1,
1991. The Company and other parties filed Motions for Rehearing, in response to which the Court of
Appeals issued a subsequent ruling on August 26, 1992, holding that deferred operating costs may be
placed in rate base. Although the Court of Appeals maintained its position that deferred carrying
costs may not be included in rate base, it stated that its opinion did not preclude the recovery of
carrying costs without rate base treatment. This would allow recovery of the carrying costs, but might
not allow the Company to earn a return on the unamortized balance of those carrying costs. The
Company estimates that the amount of return on such carrying costs previously included in revenue
requirements authorized by the Texas Commission, on an unmoderated basis, is approximately
$33.4 million as of March 31, 1994. The Texas Supreme Court granted writ of error with respect to the
issue of the propriety of deferred accounting orders and heard oral argument on the case on
September 13, 1993 (along with three similar appeals involving other Texas electric utilities). The
Texas Supreme Court has not issued its ruling on the appeals. If the Court of Appeals' decision is
upheld by the Texas Supreme Court and remanded to the Texas Commission, it is possible that the
return on the deferred carrying costs will not be refunded, but will instead be offset against the
balance of unamortized phase-in deferrals. It is also possible that the Texas Commission could find
that the inability to earn a return on deferred carrying costs has increased the Company's risk and
could, correspondingly, adjust the Company's allowed rate of return such that the previously
determined total revenue requirement would remain unchanged.
In connection with the Company's elimination of net regulatory assets from its balance sheet as
of December 31, 1991, approximately $94 million of Units 1 and 2 accounting deferrals and
$60.3 million of Unit 3 accounting deferrals have been eliminated and reported as part of the
extraordinary charge to results of operations for the year ended December 31, 1991. If the Court of
24Appeals decision is upheld and assuming no refund will be required (as discussed above), there will be
no additional write-offs required in the Company's general purpose financial statements.
Rate Case Expenses Incurred in Docket 7460. The issue of recovery of expenses incurred by the
Company and the City of El Paso in connection with Docket 7460 was severed from the issues ruled
upon by the Texas Commission in that Docket and was assigned to a new Docket 8018 for
consideration. On September 20, 1991, the Texas Commission issued its final order in the case and
approved the reimbursement of approximately $10.8 million for expenses incurred by the Company
and approximately $1.1 million for expenses incurred by the City of El Paso. The Texas Commission
further directed that such amounts be surcharged to the Company's Texas customers over a one-year
period, which the Company completed in November 1992. The City of El Paso filed an appeal of the
Texas Commission's order in Docket 8018 with the Texas District Court, and oral arguments were
held March 18, 1994. After hearing arguments, the Texas District Court affirmed the Texas
Commission's decision. Further appeals by the City of El Paso are possible. The ultimate outcome of
any such appeal and its result or the materiality thereof cannot be predicted at this time.
In connection with the Company's elimination of net regulatory assets from its balance sheet as
of December 31, 1991, the unrecovered balance of all rate case expenses previously deferred, including
cases other than Docket 7460, was eliminated. The Company expects that all of these costs ultimately
will be collected in full from its Texas customers.
Texas Recognition of Palo Verde Sales and Leasebacks. In its Docket 8363 order and a separate
order issued in August 1989 (Docket 8078), the Texas Commission found the Company's Unit 2 and
Unit 3 sales and leasebacks to be in the public interest. The rulings, if upheld on appeal, would ensure
that the Texas Commission will consider those transactions in connection with the Company's rate
cases. The finding on the Unit 2 sales and leasebacks, in addition to findings regarding federal income
tax expense and other ratemaking issues, is a part of the City of El Paso's appeal of the Docket 8363
order. The City of El Paso appealed the Texas Commission's order in Docket 8078 with respect to the
Unit 3 transactions to the Texas District Court. A hearing on the appeal of Docket 8078 has been
scheduled for August 1994. While the Company believes that the Texas District Court will uphold the
Texas Commission's orders, the ultimate outcomes of the appeals and their results or the materiality
thereof cannot be predicted with certainty at this time.
Performance Standards for Palo Verde. In 1991, the Texas Commission established performance
standards in Docket 8892 for the operation of the Palo Verde units. Each Palo Verde unit includ lin
Texas rates is evaluated annually to determine if its three-year rolling average capacity factor entitles
the Company to a reward or a penalty. There are five performance bands based around a target
capacity factor of 70%. Neither a penalty nor a reward would result from capacity factors from 62.5%
to 77.5%. Capacity factors are calculated as the ratio of actual generation to maximum possible
generation. If the capacity factor for any unit is 35% or less, the Texas Commission is required to
initiate a proceeding to determine whether such unit should continue to be included in rate base.
The performance standards are effective as of the date each unit is included in Texas rates, which
was April 22, 1988 for Units 1 and 2. In June 1993, the Company filed its third annual performance
report with the Texas Commission. The Company incurred neither a penalty nor a reward for the
1993 report. The three-year capacity factor was 72.9% for Unit 1 and 75.2% for Unit 2. The Company
expects the report to be filed with the Texas Commission in 1994 to reflect performance for Units 1 and
2 resulting in neither a penalty nor a reward, though the projected capacity factor for Unit 2 is
projected to be only slightly above the point at which a penalty could be incurred.
Recovery of Fuel Expenses. The Company recovers fuel and purchased power costs from its Texas
customers pursuant to a fixed fuel factor established by the Texas Commission. Fuel revenues
collected under the fixed fuel factor must be periodically reconciled to costs allowed by the Texas
Commission. The Company's last reconciliation, Docket 8588, was for the period August 1, 1985
25through March 31, 1989, and involved over $200 million in Texas fuel costs. The final order issued in
1990 required a refund of approximately $7.1 million, plus interest, which the Company completed
over a twelve-month period beginning in February 1991. The Company and the City of El Paso
appealed the Texas Commission's order in Docket 8588 to the Texas District Court. On November 25,
1991, the Texas District Court entered judgment on the appeals, upholding the Texas Commission's
order on all points except the Company's appeal of the treatment of certain purchased power capacity
costs during 1985-86. With regard to those costs, totaling approximately $4.2 million, the Texas
District Court held that the Texas Commission erred in failing to justify adequately its decision not to
allow the Company to recover such costs through its reconcilable fuel account. The Texas District
Court remanded the case to the Texas Commission with instructions to reconsider the allowance of
such costs. Both the Texas Commission and the City of El Paso appealed the Texas District Court's
decision to the Court of Appeals. On March 10, 1993, the Court of Appeals affirmed the decision of the
Texas District Court. On February 2, 1994, the Texas Supreme Court denied the applications for writ
of error filed by the City of El Paso and the Texas Commission. The case will be remanded to the Texas
Commission for a new hearing to address whether the Company should be allowed to include the
purchased power capacity charges as reconcilable fuel costs and recover such costs. The ultimate
outcome of this hearing cannot be predicted at this time.
On January 26, 1993, the Texas Commission adopted a new fuel rule allowing for adjustment of
the fixed fuel factor every six months on a prescribed schedule and requiring reconciliation of fuel
costs and revenues whenever three years of fuel data have accumulated. Under the new rule, both
refunds and surcharges are allowed without changing the fixed fuel factor where the cumulative over-
or under-recovered fuel balance, including interest, is greater than or equal to 4% of the estimated
annual fuel costs adopted most recently by the Texas Commission. The Texas Commission is required
to act on a petition to change a fixed fuel factor within sixty or ninety days, depending on whether a
hearing is required. The Company is allowed under the prescribed schedule to petition for a change in
its Texas fixed fuel factor in January and July of each year under the new rule.
Ratemaking Treatment of Federal Income Taxes. In a 1987 case involving an electric utility, the
Texas Supreme Court determined that, under certain circumstances, it is appropriate to allow only
"actual taxes incurred" for ratemaking purposes. The Court of Appeals has applied the Texas
Supreme Court decision to another utility. Public Utility Commission of Texas v. GTE-Southwest,
833 S.W.2d 153 (Tex. App. - Austin 1992, writ granted). The Texas Supreme Court heard oral
argument in that case in September 1993 and has not ruled yet.
Additionally, the Texas Commission has recently applied various forms of the "actual taxes
incurred" methodology in rate proceedings involving other utilities. There is significant uncertainty
as to the application of the methodology used in those proceedings. The Texas Commission historically
had granted rates that included an income tax component based on a "stand alone basis" and on the
utility's allowed return on equity. The Texas Commission has now altered this policy. The appeals
related to Dockets 8363 and 9945 include claims that the Texas Commission failed to adhere to the
"actual taxes incurred" methodology in setting the federal income tax expense component of the
Company's rates. As a result, any remand of Dockets 7460, 8363, 9165 or 9945 to the Texas
Commission could include a reconsideration of the respective federal income tax components, which
were based on the "stand alone" methodology previously used by the Texas Commission.
Depending on the outcome of any such remand, the Company may be required to refund certain
amounts collected in rates since 1988. The likelihood and amount of any refunds are uncertain at this
time because the ultimate outcome of the pending appeals is unknown, and the Company cannot
predict the result of any remand.
Texas Rates Proposed in the Plan of Reorganization. For a discussion of the rate path proposed as
part of the Company's Plan, see "Bankruptcy Proceedings for Reorganization - Regulatory Aspects of
the Plan and Merger-Proposed Texas Rate Treatment," above.
26New Mexico Rate Matters
Rate Moderation Plan-Palo Verde. In 1987, the New Mexico Commission approved a stipulation
in Case 2009 establishing a rate moderation plan, pursuant to which the New Mexico jurisdictional
portion of the Company's interest in Unit 1 and one-third of Common Plant and approximately 83% of
the lease payments on Unit 2 and the related Common Plant were phased-in to rates in three steps.
After the third step of the phase-in, the plan froze New Mexico rates through December 31, 1994. The
Company agreed that it will not request rate base or cost of service treatment, or other rate
recognition, for Unit 3 and its related Common Plant.
The Company will be required to recover the New Mexico jurisdictional portion of the Company's
investment in Unit 3 through off-system sales in the economy energy market. For several years,
market prices for economy energy sales have not been at levels sufficient to recover the New Mexico
portion of the Company's current operating expenses related to Unit 3, including decommissioning
costs and lease payments. The Company expects these market prices to remain at such levels in the
near term. The Company projects, however, that the market prices of economy energy ultimately will
rise to a level sufficient to recover the New Mexico jurisdictional portion of the Company's investment
in Unit 3 over the remaining life of the asset.
Performance Standards for Palo Verde. In 1986, the New Mexico Commission established
performance standards in Case 1833 for the operation of the Palo Verde units. The entire station is
evaluated annually to determine if its achieved capacity factor entitles the Company to a reward or a
penalty. There are five performance bands based around a target capacity factor of 67.5%. Neither a
penalty nor a reward would result from capacity factors from 60% to 75%. The capacity factor is
calculated as the ratio of actual generation to maximum possible generation. Since Unit 3 is not in
rate base for purposes of New Mexico rates, any penalty or reward calculated on a total station basis is
limited to two-thirds of such penalty or reward. If the annual capacity factor is 35% or less, the
New Mexico Commission is required to initiate a proceeding to reconsider the rate base treatment.
Annual Filing Requirements. Pursuant to the New Mexico Commission's order in Case 1833, the
Company must make annual filings, at least through the term of the rate moderation plan, to reconcile
fuel costs and establish the fixed fuel factor for New Mexico customers. An annual performance
standards report is included in the fuel reconciliation and any resulting rewards or penalties are
included in the establishment of a new fixed fuel factor, if a new factor is warranted. The Company
has received an extension through March 31, 1994 to file its annual fuel reconciliation report for the
period January 1, 1993 through December 31, 1993. The Company expects such report will result in a
significantly higher fuel factor, including no reward or penalty under the performance standards. The
new factor is proposed to be implemented in May 1994. The Company also has requested an extension
to file a cost of service compliance report with the New Mexico Commission in June 1994.
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission Rate Matters
The majority of the Company's rates for wholesale power and transmission services are subject to
regulation by the FERC. Sales of wholesale power subject to FERC regulation make up a significant
portion, approximately 15% in 1993, of the Company's operating revenues. Although rates to
wholesale customers require FERC approval, the Company and its wholesale customers generally
have established such rates through negotiations, based on certain cost of service assumptions, subject
to FERC acceptance of the negotiated rates.
The Company has a long-term firm power sales agreement with IID providing for the sale of
100 MW of firm capacity to IID through April 2002. The Company also provides contingent capacity of
50 MW to IID. The agreement generally provides for level sales prices over the life of the agreement,
which were intended to recover fully the Company's projected costs, as well as a return. Because of the
27levelized rate, such costs and return were anticipated to exceed revenues for a number of the early
years of the agreement with a reciprocal effect in the later years of the agreement. The Company has
accrued revenues under the terms of the agreement in the amounts of $2.4 million, $2.9 million, and
$4.9 million in 1993, 1992 and 1991, respectively. Such accrued amounts, which since the inception of
the agreement aggregate $32 million as of December 31, 1993, are recorded as a long-term contract
receivable on the Company's balance sheets. Based on the contractual payments, recovery of the
unbilled amounts should begin in 1995. The agreement also provides that the Company may seek
increases in the sales price if sufficient evidence exists to determine that certain operating costs have
increased above those used in determining the original sales price.
The Company has a firm power sales agreement with TNP, providing for sales to TNP in the
amount of 79 MW in 1993 and 75 MW thereafter through 2002, subject to provisions in the agreement
that allow a reduction to a minimum of 25 MW in the amount of demand on a yearly basis. TNP has
provided the Company notice that it would take advantage of the provisions to reduce the contract
demand to 25 MW for 1994 and 1995, while preserving its option to maintain or reduce its contract
demand in subsequent years. Sales prices, which decline over the life of the agreement, are based on
substantially the same scheduled and projected costs and return as the IID agreement discussed above.
Rate tariffs currently applicable to IID and TNP contain appropriate fuel and purchased power
cost adjustment provisions designed to recover the Company's fuel and purchased power costs.
Other Wholesale Customers
The Company has a sales agreement to provide capacity and associated energy to CFE through
the end of 1996. The sales will be at 150 MW during the summer months and 120 MW at other times of
the year through the remaining term of the agreement. Pricing for the agreement includes an
escalating capacity charge and recovery of energy costs at system-average costs plus third-party
energy charges. To support the requirements of the agreement with CFE, the Company entered into a
firm power purchase agreement with SPS for at least 50 MW during the term of the CFE contract.
Construction Program
The Company has no current plans to construct any new base load generating facilities through
the year 2000. This, however, is subject to change depending on the the Company's continued ability to
receive a full allotment of power from Palo Verde. For a discussion of the operations of Palo Verde, see
Part 1, "Facilities, Palo Verde Station." Utility construction expenditures reflected in the table below
consist primarily of expanding and updating the electric transmission and distribution systems and
the cost of betterments and improvements relating to the Palo Verde Station. The Company's
estimated cash construction costs for 1994 through 1997 set forth in the table below are approximately
$223 million. Actual costs may vary from the construction program estimates set forth below. Such
estimates are reviewed and updated from time to time to reflect changed conditions.
1994
1995
1996
1997
By Year (1)
(In millions)
Production (1)
Transmission
Distribution
General
Total
(1) Does not include acquisition costs for nuclear fuel. See "Energy Sources - Nuclear Fuel."
Total
6545N
49792
64
53
47
59
223
By Function
(In millions)
28
67
61
74
21
223Facilities
As described below, the Company currently has a net installed generating capacity of 1,497 MW,
consisting of an entitlement of 600 MW from Palo Verde Units 1, 2 and 3, an entitlement of 104 MW
from Four Corners Units 4 and 5, 478 MW at Newman, 246 MW at Rio Grande and 69 MW at Copper.
Palo Verde Station
As of the date it filed the bankruptcy petition, the Company owned or leased a 15.8% interest in
each of the three 1,270 MW nuclear generating units and Common Plant at the Palo Verde Station
near Phoenix, Arizona (owned as to Unit 1 and approximately 60% of Unit 3, and leased as to Unit 2
and approximately 40% of Unit 3). The Palo Verde Participants include the Company and six other
utilities: APS, Southern California Edison Company, PNM, Southern California Public Power
Authority, Salt River Project Agricultural Improvement and Power District and the Los Angeles
Department of Water and Power. Palo Verde Participants share costs and generating entitlements in
the same proportion as their percentage interests in the generating units. APS serves as operating
agent for the Palo Verde Station.
In August and December 1986, the Company sold and leased back all of its 15.8% undivided
interest in Unit 2 and one-third of its undivided interest in certain Common Plant at Palo Verde for
approximately $684.4 million cash. In December 1987, the Company sold and leased back
approximately 40% of its undivided 15.8% interest in Unit 3 for approximately $250 million cash. The
sales were to the Owner Trustee as trustee for the Owner Participants. Of the total sales price of
approximately $934.4 million, the Owner Participants paid approximately $192 million. The balance
of the sales price was obtained by the Owner Trustee securing debt financing through a pledge of its
rights under the leasebacks to the Company and, with respect to Unit 3, a pledge of the undivided
interest.
The Company's investment in Palo Verde, both directly and through the sale and leaseback
transactions, has a material impact on the Company's financial position and results of operations. See
Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Notes B and E of Notes to Financial
Statements." Accordingly, an analysis of this investment and related obligations has been a central
issue in the Company's formulation of a reorganization plan. For a discussion of the proposed
treatment of Palo Verde under the Plan, see "Bankruptcy Proceedings for Reorganization of the
Company - Treatment of Palo Verde" above.
Operation of each of the three Palo Verde units requires an operating license from the NRC. Full
power operating licenses for Units 1, 2 and 3 were issued by the NRC in June 1985, April 1986 and
November 1987, respectively. The full power operating licenses, each valid for a period of 40 years,
authorize APS, as operating agent for Palo Verde, to operate the three Palo Verde units at full power.
Water Supply. In connection with the construction and operation of Palo Verde, APS, as
operating agent; has entered into contracts with certain municipalities granting APS the right to
purchase effluent for cooling purposes at Palo Verde. A summons served on APS in early 1986
required all water claimants in the Lower Gila River Watershed in Arizona to assert any claims to
water on or before January 20, 1987, in an action pending in Maricopa County Superior Court (In re
The General Adjudication of All Rights to Use Water in the Gila River System and Source, Supreme
Court Nos. WC-79-0001 through WC-79-0004 (Consolidated) [WC-1, WC-2, WC-3 and WC-4
(Consolidated)], Maricopa County Nos. W-1, W-2, W-3 and W-4 (Consolidated)). Palo Verde is located
within the geographic area subject to the summons, and the rights of the Palo Verde Participants,
including the Company, to the use of groundwater and effluent at Palo Verde is potentially at issue in
this action. APS, as project manager of Palo Verde, filed claims that dispute the court's jurisdiction
over the Palo Verde Participants' groundwater rights and their contractual rights to effluent relating
to Palo Verde and, alternatively, seek confirmation of such rights. On December 10, 1992, the Arizona
29Supreme Court heard oral argument on certain issues in this matter that are pending on interlocutory
appeal and, as a result, issues important to the Palo Verde claims have been remanded to the trial
court for further action. No trial date has been set in this matter.
Although the foregoing matter remains subject to further evaluation, APS has advised the
Company that APS expects that the described litigation will not have a materially adverse impact on
the operation of Palo Verde.
Liability and Insurance Matters. The Palo Verde Participants have insurance for public liability
payments resulting from nuclear energy hazards to the full limit of liability under federal law. This
potential liability is covered by primary liability insurance provided by commercial insurance carriers
in the amount of $200 million and the balance by an industry-wide retrospective assessment program.
The maximum assessment per reactor under the retrospective rating program for each nuclear
incident is approximately $79.2 million, subject to an annual limit of $10 million per incident. Based
upon the Company's 15.8% interest in the three Palo Verde units, the Company's maximum potential
assessment per incident is approximately $37.6 million, with an annual payment limitation of
approximately $4.7 million.
The Palo Verde Participants maintain "all risk" (including nuclear hazards) insurance for
property damage to, and decontamination of, property at Palo Verde in the aggregate amount of
$2.7 billion, a substantial portion of which must first be applied to stabilization and decontamination.
The Company has also secured insurance against portions of any increased cost of generation or
purchased power resulting from the accidental outage of any of the three units if the outage exceeds
21 weeks.
Decommissioning. For information regarding the obligations of the Company to plan and fund,
over the service life of Palo Verde, its share of the estimated costs to decommission Palo Verde, see
Part II, Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of
Operations - Operational Challenges" and Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Date -
Note E of Notes to Financial Statements." The Company is currently collecting a portion of
decommissioning costs for its investment in Palo Verde Units 1 and 2 in all three jurisdictions, and for
Unit 3 in its Texas and FERC jurisdictions. The Company must fund the decommissioning
requirements for its New Mexico jurisdictional portion of Unit 3 through off-system sales of economy
energy. Because the Company is under fixed price contracts with its FERC customers, the amount of
decommissioning costs received in current rates is not sufficient to fund the FERC portion of the
revised decommissioning costs and, therefore, the Company must fund this shortfall.
ANPP Participation Agreement. Pursuant to the ANPP Participation Agreement, each
Palo Verde Participant is required to fund its proportionate share of operation and maintenance,
capital and fuel costs of Palo Verde. The Company's total monthly share of these costs is
approximately $7 million. The Participation Agreement provides that if a Palo Verde Participant fails
to meet its payment obligations, each non-defaulting Palo Verde Participant shall pay its
proportionate share of the payments owed by the defaulting Palo Verde Participant. On February 13,
1992, the Bankruptcy Court approved a stipulation between the Company and APS, as the operating
agent of Palo Verde, pursuant to which the Company agreed to pay its proportionate share of all
Palo Verde invoices delivered to the Company after February 6, 1992. The Company agreed to make
these payments until such time as an order is entered by the Bankruptcy Court, if ever, authorizing or
directing the Company's rejection of the Participation Agreement governing the relationship among
the Palo Verde Participants. The stipulation also specifies that approximately $9.2 million of the
Company's Palo Verde payment obligations are to be considered prepetition general unsecured claims
of the other Palo Verde Participants. Pursuant to the Plan, the Company intends to assume the ANPP
Participation Agreement and the other agreements related to the operation of Palo Verde. To
accomplish this and to resolve pending issues related to the assumption of the agreements and cure of
existing defaults, the Company and the other Palo Verde Participants have entered into a Cure and
30Assumption Agreement that was approved by the Bankruptcy Court on November 19, 1993. The Cure
and Assumption Agreement sets forth the mechanism by which the ANPP Participation Agreement
and other operating agreements related to Palo Verde will be assumed as of the Effective Date.
Pursuant to the agreement, the Company paid APS, as operating agent, the amount of the prepetition
obligations and APS paid the Company amounts of prepetition refunds that had been withheld, subject
to all of such amounts being returned in the event the Plan does not become effective. For a discussion
of the issues related to assumption of the ANPP Participation Agreement, see "Bankruptcy
Proceedings for Reorganization of the Company - Treatment of Palo Verde," above.
Steam Generator Tubes. APS is continuing its investigation and analysis of steam generator
tube degradation experienced at the plant. The incidence was discovered following the rupture of a
tube in one steam generator in Unit 2 on March 14, 1993. APS declared an "alert" at Unit 2 due to the
rupture and took action to remove the unit from service. An alert is the next to the lowest of the four
NRC emergency classifications at a nuclear power plant. The alert was terminated on March 15, 1993.
Unit 2 began a regular refueling outage on March 19, 1993, which originally had been schedule to
begin March 20, 1993. The outage was extended to early September 1993 and expanded to encompass
testing and inspection of tubes in the two steam generators in the unit. In reports to the NRC, APS
indicated it determined the cause of the steam generator tube rupture to be due to intergranular
attack/intergranular stress corrosion cracking ("IGA/IGSCC") and that several environmental and
chemical factors contributed to the IGA/IGSCC. APS developed corrective actions designed to
mitigate the effects of the factors that contribute to IGA/IGSCC. Unit 2 was returned to service in
early September 1993 at a level of 85% power.
On January 8, 1994, APS removed Unit 2 from service to inspect and chemically clean the two
steam generators in a mid-cycle outage. APS has completed the inspection and the cleaning and the
available results of the inspection have revealed additional tube degradation of the type (axial
cracking in upper bundle) previously found in the unit's steam generators. The inspection also
revealed a more common type of tube degradation (circumferential cracking at tubesheet) that has
occurred in similarly designed steam generators at other nuclear plants. Unit 2 was returned to
service on March 22,1994 and has achieved 85% power as of March 29, 1994.
In September 1993, APS removed Unit 1 from service for a regularly scheduled refueling outage,
during which an expanded inspection of the unit's two steam generators was scheduled. APS has
informed the NRC the inspection did not reveal the accelerated tube degradation of the type
experienced in Init 2, but that the inspection has revealed the more common type of degradation and
cracking (circumferential cracking at tubesheet). APS identified probable causes of the degradation
as well as preventive and corrective measures that can be taken. APS has operated Unit 1 at 85%
power until late February 1994, when it increased power to 86%.
Unit 3 was removed from service from late November 1993 to December 26, 1993 for a mid-cycle
outage during which APS inspected the unit's two steam generators. APS has informed the NRC that
the inspection did not reveal the type of steam generator degradation experienced in Unit 2's steam
generators; however, the inspection did reveal the more common type of steam generator tube
degradation (circumferential cracking at tubesheet). Due to the foregoing, APS has operated Unit 3 at
85% power from September 1993 (other than during the mid-cycle inspection outage) until late
February, when it increased power to 86%. Unit 3 entered a regularly scheduled refueling outage on
March 19, 1994, which will include additional inspection and chemical cleaning of the steam
generators.
As described above, APS has performed, and is continuing, certain actions related to the steam
generators, including chemical cleaning, operating the units at reduced temperatures and, for some
period, operating the units at 85-86% power. APS has proposed that, as a result of these corrective
actions, all three units should be returned to 100% power by mid-1995 and one or more units might be
returned to 100% power at some point during 1994. As a result of the extended Unit 2 outage during
311993, reduced power operations of each Unit beginning in September 1993 and the mid-cycle
inspection of Unit 2 beginning in November 1993, the Company estimates it incurred additional fuel
and purchased power costs aggregating approximately $10 million in 1993. During 1994, the
Company estimates that it will incur additional fuel and purchased power costs averaging
approximately $1 million for each month that the units are operated at 85-86% power.
Four Corners Project
The Company has an undivided 7% interest in Units 4 and 5 at Four Corners located in
northwestern New Mexico. Each of the coalburning generating units has a 739 MW capability. For
emergencies each unit is rated at 784 MW. Both units are located adjacent to a surface-mined supply of
coal and are jointly owned by the Company, APS (which is the operating agent for Four Corners), TEP,
PNM, Southern California Edison Company and Salt River Project Agricultural Improvement and
Power District.
Pursuant to an agreement among the participants in Four Corners Units 4 and 5, each
participant is required to fund its proportionate share of operation and maintenance, capital and fuel
costs of Four Corners Units 4 and 5. The Company's total monthly share of these costs is
approximately $1.1 million. The agreement provides that if a participant fails to meet its payment
obligations, each non-defaulting participant shall pay its proportionate share of the payments owed by
the defaulting participant. The Company has been paying operating and maintenance, capital and
fuel costs related to Four Corners incurred after the date of the Company's bankruptcy petition, but
has not paid any amounts incurred prepetition. In December 1992, the Company filed a motion in the
Bankruptcy Court to assume all of the contracts related to Four Corners. The Motion has not yet been
acted on by the Bankruptcy Court. If the motion is approved by the Bankruptcy Court, the Company
would be obligated to pay the prepetition claims related to such contracts, which approximate
$1.2 million.
The Four Corners Plant is located on land held under easements from the federal government
and also under a lease from the Navajo Nation. Certain of the transmission lines and almost all of the
contracted coal sources for the Four Corners Plant are also located on Navajo land.
The participants in Four Corners are among the defendants in a suit filed by the State of
New Mexico in March 1975 in state district court in New Mexico against the United States of America,
the City of Farmington, New Mexico, the Secretary of the Interior as Trustee for the Navajo Nation
and other Indian tribes and certain other defendants (State of New Mexico ex rel. New Mexico State
Engineer v. United States of America, et al., San Juan District Court, Cause No. 75-184). The suit
seeks adjudication of the water rights of the San Juan River Stream System in New Mexico, which,
among other things, supplies the water used at Four Corners. No trial date has been set in this matter
and the case has been inactive for some time. An agreement reached with the Navajo Nation in 1985,
however, provides that if Four Corners loses a portion of its rights in the adjudication, the Navajo
Nation will provide, at a cost to be determined at that time, sufficient water from its allocation to offset
the loss.
Newman Power Station
The Newman Power Station, located in El Paso, Texas, consists of three steam-electric units with
an aggregate capability of 266 MW and one combined-cycle unit with a capability of 212 MW. The
units primarily operate on intrastate natural gas, but also are capable of operating on interstate
natural gas and fuel oil. See "Energy Sources-Natural Gas."
32Rio Grande Power Station
The Rio Grande Power Station, located in Sunland Park, New Mexico, adjacent to El Paso, Texas,
consists of three steam-electric generating units which have an aggregate capability of 246 MW when
operating entirely on natural gas. The units operate primarily on interstate natural gas, but are also
capable of operating on fuel oil. See "Energy Sources-Natural Gas."
Copper Power Station
The Copper Power Station, located in El Paso, Texas, consists of a 69 MW combustion turbine
capable of operating on fuel oil or natural gas and is used for peaking purposes. The combustion
turbine and other generation equipment at the station were sold and leased-back by the Company in
1980 pursuant to a twenty-year lease with an option to renew of up to seven years. Such lease is
subject to review as an executory contract and may be assumed or rejected by the Company in the
course of its bankruptcy proceedings. In December 1992, the Company filed a motion with the
Bankruptcy Court to assume all of the agreements related to the sale and leaseback. The motion has
not been ruled upon as of the current date. See "Bankruptcy Proceedings for Reorganization of the
Company." The station operates primarily on intrastate natural gas, but also is capable of operating
on fuel oil. See "Energy Sources-Natural Gas."
Transmission Lines
The Company owns the following facilities:
1. A 310-mile, 345 KV transmission line from TEP's Springerville Generating Plant near
Springerville, Arizona, to the Luna Substation near Deming, New Mexico, to the Diablo Substation
near Sunland Park, New Mexico. This line is known as the Arizona Interconnection Project (AIP) and
provides an interconnection with TEP for delivery of the Company's generation entitlements from
Palo Verde and Four Corners. The AIP also enables the Company to import low cost energy from the
Arizona/New Mexico power grid, enhances the Company's transmission system reliability, better
equips the Company to meet future strategic generating resource mix requirements and further
enables the Company to benefit from economy energy purchases.
2. A 202-mile, 345 KV transmission line from the Arroyo Substation, located near Las Cruces,
New Mexico, to PNM's West Mesa Substation located near Albuquerque, New Mexico. This line
provides the Company's primary interconnection with PNM over which the Company's Four Corners
entitlement is delivered. This entitlement is delivered from Four Corners to West Mesa over PNM's
345 KV and 230 KV transmission system in northern New Mexico. Additionally, through the
Company's interconnection with PNM, the Company has a major interconnection with the other five
participants in Four Corners, plus access to power the Company obtains from the economy markets
west and north of Four Corners.
3. Undivided interests in a 196-mile, 345 KV transmission line from the Newman Power
Station across southwestern New Mexico, to TEP's Greenlee Substation in Arizona. Specifically, the
Company owns an undivided 40% interest in the 60-mile, 345 KV line between TEP's Greenlee
Substation and the Hidalgo Substation near Lordsburg, New Mexico; an undivided 57.2% interest in
the 50-mile, 345 KV line between the Hidalgo Substation and the Luna Substation near Deming,
New Mexico; and a 100% interest in the 86-mile, 345 KV line between the Luna Substation and the
Newman Power Station. This line provides an interconnection with TEP for delivery of the Company's
entitlements from Four Corners and Palo Verde, as well as providing added stability, flexibility and
reliability to the Company's system.
4. An undivided 66.67% interest in a 125-mile, 345 KV transmission line between the AMRAD
Substation near Oro Grande, New Mexico, and SPS's Eddy County Substation near Artesia,
33New Mexico. This line terminates at a high-voltage direct current (HVDC) converter facility
connected with SPS, providing the Company with access to the Southwestern Power Pool power
market.
Environmental Matters
The Company is subject to regulation with respect to air, soil and water quality, solid waste
disposal and other environmental matters by federal, state and local authorities. These authorities
govern current facility operations and exercise continuing jurisdiction over facility modifications.
Environmental regulations can change at a rapid pace and cannot be predicted with certainty. The
construction of new facilities is subject to standards imposed by environmental regulation and
substantial expenditures may be required to comply with such regulations. Recognition in rates of the
capital expenditures and operating costs incurred in response to environmental considerations will be
subject to normal regulatory review and standards. The Company analyzes the costs of its obligations
arising from environmental matters on an on-going basis and believes it has made adequate provision
in its financial statements to meet such obligations.
Clean Air Act. In November 1990, the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 (the "Clean Air Act")
became law. The Clean Air Act establishes new regulatory and permitting programs that will be
administered by EPA or delegated to state agencies. Many provisions of the Clean Air Act will affect
operations by electric utilities, including the Company. In particular, the following areas addressed in
the Clean Air Act may have a significant impact on the Company: Title I dealing with nonattainment
of national air ambient quality standards, Title IV dealing with acid rain, and Title V covering
operating permits. In addition, provisions addressing mobile sources of pollutants and hazardous air
pollutants may have a lesser impact on the Company's operations.
The Company has completed an initial evaluation of the impact of the Clean Air Act on the
Company's operations and has developed a five-year plan beginning in 1993 to implement Clean Air
Act requirements on existing facilities. As part of the plan, the Company will make modifications to
existing facilities at the Newman Power Station and the Rio Grande Power Station, including
modifications to the steam generators and combustion turbines and the installation of continuous
emissions monitoring equipment. The projected costs of these capital improvements are
approximately $5 million over the five-year period of the plan.
Rio Grande Power Station. The Company has notified NMED of a spill of approximately
510 barrels of fuel oil which occurred at the Rio Grande Power Station in August 1986. The initial site
assessment has been completed, a remediation plan has been submitted to NMED, and remediation is
progressing under the plan. Potential clean-up costs are currently estimated to be less than $500,000
to be incurred over the next five to ten years. The New Mexico Water Quality Act provides for a
potential penalty of $1,000 for each day of violation, which for a five-year period could result in a
penalty of approximately $2 million. The Company has been in close communication with the NMED
and does not believe that a penalty of such magnitude will be assessed. The NMED has filed a proof of
claim in the Bankruptcy Case reflecting an alleged obligation in an unspecified sum based on alleged
ground water or soil contamination at the Rio Grande Power Station.
COL-TEX Refinery Site. In November 1991, the Company was notified by the TNRCC that the
Company had been identified as a potentially responsible party ("PRP") at the Col-Tex Refinery Texas
Superfund Site in Colorado City, Mitchell County, Texas (the "Col-Tex Site"). The Col-Tex Site
consists of approximately 25 acres located along the Colorado River immediately west of Colorado
City, Texas. The Col-Tex Site was the location of several oil refining companies that owned and/or
operated at the Col-Tex Site from the 1920s to the late 1960s.
The State of Texas, on behalf of the TNRCC, filed a proof of claim in the Company's Bankruptcy
Case for remediation and oversight costs and requested that the claim be accorded administrative
34expense priority designation. The TNRCC's position is that the Company is a PRP and is, therefore,
jointly and severally liable for the full cost of clean-up and oversight at the Col-Tex Site. The TNRCC
has informed the Company informally that it estimates site assessment costs to be approximately
$3 million and the total clean-up costs to be approximately $22 million. The Company disputes that it
is liable as a PRP under applicable law. Accordingly, the Company has not agreed to participate in the
assessment and remediation of the Col-Tex Site.
The Company also received notice on January 12, 1993 of the State's review of liability in
connection with an expansion of the Col-Tex Site to an area referred to as Col-Tex II. The Company
has been identified as a PRP in connection with this expanded site, but its position with respect to
liability there is consistent with its position with respect to the Col-Tex Site.
The following entities have filed proofs of claim in the Bankruptcy Case related to potential
claims for contribution in the event any of such entities has liability for remediation and oversight
costs of the Col-Tex Site: ASARCO, Inc., Tesoro Petroleum Company, Fina Oil & Chemical Company
and Missouri Pacific Railroad Company.
On November 24, 1993, a Joint Motion for Order Approving the Withdrawal of Proofs of Claim
filed by the State of Texas was filed in the Bankruptcy Case by attorneys for the Company and the
State of Texas. Fina Oil & Chemical Company filed an objection to the motion and, at this time, no
action has been taken by the Bankruptcy Court.
Energy Sources
General
The following table lists the percentage contribution of coal, gas, uranium, and purchased power
to the total energy mix of the Company.
Uranium
1991
1992
1993
53%
51
43
Nuclear Fuel
Gas
29%
31
29
Coal
10%
10
10
35
Purchased Power
8%
8
For a discussion of the recovery by the Company of its fuel costs, see "Regulation - Texas Rate
Matters - Recovery of Fuel Expenses," "Regulation - - New Mexico Rate Matters Annual Filing
Requirements," and "Regulation - Federal Energy Regulatory Commission Rate Matters."
-
18
Nuclear Fuel Cycle. The fuel cycle for Palo Verde is comprised of the following stages: (i) the
mining and milling of uranium ore to produce uranium concentrates; (ii) the conversion of uranium
concentrates to uranium hexafluoride; (iii) the enrichment of uranium hexafluoride; (iv) the
fabrication of fuel assemblies; (v) the utilization of fuel assemblies in reactors; and (vi) the storage of
spent fuel and the disposal thereof. The Palo Verde Participants, including the Company, have made
arrangements through contract flexibilities to obtain quantities of uranium concentrate anticipated to
be sufficient to meet operational requirements through 1996. Existing contract options could be
utilized to meet approximately 50% of requirements from 1997 through 1999 and 30% of requirements
for 2000 through 2002. Spot purchases in the uranium market will be made, as appropriate, in lieu of
any uranium that might be obtained through contract flexibilities and options. The Palo Verde
Participants, including the Company, have contracted for all conversion services required through
1994 and for up to 65% of conversion services required through 1998, with options to continue throughthe year 2000. The Palo Verde Participants, including the Company, have an enrichment services
contract with DOE which obligates DOE to furnish the enrichment services required for the operation
of the three Palo Verde units over a term expiring in November 2014, with annual options to
terminate each year of the contract with ten years prior notice. In view of other alternatives, the
Palo Verde Participants have exercised this option, terminating 30% of requirements for 1996 through
1998 and 100% of requirements during the years 1999 through 2002. Purchasers of enrichment
services from the DOE are assessed for the costs of the decontamination and decommissioning of DOE
enrichment facilities pursuant to provisions of the Energy Policy Act of 1992. Existing contracts will
provide fuel assembly fabrication services for at least ten years from the operation date of each
Palo Verde unit and, through contract options, approximately fifteen additional years are available.
Spent fuel storage facilities at Palo Verde have sufficient capacity with certain modifications to
store all fuel expected to be discharged from normal operation of all of the Palo Verde units through at
least the year 2005. Pursuant to the Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982, as amended in 1987 (the
"Waste Act"), DOE is obligated to accept and dispose of all spent nuclear fuel and other high-level
radioactive wastes generated by all domestic power reactors. The NRC, pursuant to the Waste Act,
also requires operators of nuclear power reactors to enter into spent fuel disposal contracts with DOE.
APS, on behalf of itself and the other Palo Verde Participants, including the Company, has executed a
spent fuel disposal contract with DOE. The Waste Act also obligates DOE develop the facilities
necessary for the permanent disposal of all spent fuel generated and to be generated by domestic power
reactors and to have the first such facility in operation by 1998 under prescribed procedures. In
November 1989, DOE reported that such permanent disposal facility will not be in operation until
2010, seven years later than previously reported. As a result, under DOE's current criteria for
shipping allocation rights, Palo Verde's spent fuel shipments to the DOE permanent disposal facility
would begin in approximately 2025. In addition, APS has indicated that on-site storage of spent fuel
may be required beyond the life of Palo Verde's generating units. APS also has indicated that
alternative interim spent fuel storage methods will be available on-site or off-site for use by
Palo Verde to allow its continued operation beyond 2005 and to store spent fuel safely until DOE's
scheduled shipments from Palo Verde begin.
Nuclear Fuel Financing. Pursuant to the ANPP Participation Agreement, the Company has an
undivided interest in nuclear fuel purchased and to be purchased in connection with Palo Verde. The
Company has a nuclear fuel purchase contract with an independent trust for the purpose of financing
the Company's purchases of nuclear fuel. Prior to the filing of the Company's bankruptcy petition, the
trust generally financed nuclear fuel and all costs in connection with the acquisition the Company's
share of nuclear fuel for use at Palo Verde up to $125 million pursuant to a borrowing facility that is
supported by a letter of credit. The Company had the option of either paying for the fuel from the trust
at the time the fuel was loaded into the reactor or paying for the fuel at the time heat was generated by
the fuel. Prior to the petition date of the Bankruptcy Case, the Company elected to pay for the fuel as
the heat was produced from the fuel. Since the Company filed its bankruptcy petition, the Company
has not sought to finance its fuel costs from the trust, but has instead paid for nuclear fuel with
internally generated funds.
The trust has filed a proof of claim in the Bankruptcy Case, alleging an unliquidated prepetition
amount owed by the Company to it of not less than approximately $70.9 million, plus an additional
unliquidated amount for postpetition interest on the obligation and other fees and costs, plus an
additional unliquidated amount for fuel consumed by the Company after the petition date (which
amount the trust asserts is an administrative expense claim). The trust also has filed a proof of claim
in the Bankruptcy Case based on a related note payable to the trust, alleging an unsecured prepetition
claim of approximately $9.9 million. The trust contends that it has an enforceable property interest in
Palo Verde nuclear fuel, power, energy and revenues, which the Company is disputing in the
Bankruptcy Case. The trust and the Company entered into an interim adequate protection order in
the Bankruptcy Case, which essentially preserves the rights, positions and arguments of each party,
but does not resolve disputes as to the trust's claims and interests in property. For a discussion of the
36resolution of the disputes and the treatment of the trust's claim under the Plan, see "Bankruptcy
Proceedings for Reorganization of the Company - -Treatment of Claims Under the Plan," above.
Natural Gas
In 1993, the Company's interstate natural gas requirements at the Rio Grande Power Station
were met solely with spot natural gas purchases from various suppliers. The Company's interstate gas
is transported under a firm gas transportation agreement, which became effective September 1, 1991
and expires in 2001. Based on the current availability of abundant, economic and reliable spot natural
gas, the Company anticipates it will continue to purchase spot natural gas for the Rio Grande Power
Station for the near term. For the long term, the Company will evaluate the continued availability of
spot natural gas versus other supplies in obtaining a reliable and economical supply for the
Rio Grande Power Station.
The intrastate natural gas requirements for the Newman Power Station and the Copper Power
Station are supplied and transported pursuant to an intrastate natural gas contract with Meridian Oil
Transportation ("MoTrans"), which is effective through December 31, 1995. Prior to the contract
expiring in 1995, the Company will evaluate a continued relationship with MoTrans versus other
suppliers to ensure the continued supply of reliable and economic natural gas for the Newman Power
Station and the Copper Power Station.
The Company's agreements to purchase natural gas are generally executory contracts subject to
assumption or rejection in Bankruptcy ase. The Company has filed a statement with the
Bankruptcy Court indicating that it intends to assume the MoTrans Agreement on the Effective Date.
Coal
The Company believes that the Four Corners Plant has sufficient reserves of low sulfur coa! (the
sulfur content of which is currently running at 0.8%) committed to the plant to continue operating it
for its useful life. APS purchases all of the coal which fuels the Four Corners Plant from a coal supplier
with a long-term lease of coal reserves owned by the Navajo Nation. In 1993, the prices paid for coal
were relatively stable, although applicable contract clauses permit escalations under certain
conditions. In addition, major price changes from time to time result from contract renegotiation.
APS, as operating agent for Four Corners, entered into an incentive coal price agreement on behalf of
the Four Corners Participants effective November 1991 and continuing through 1994 providing for
price reductions on amounts of coal purchased in excess of a set base amount.
37Name
David H. Wiggs, Jr.
Curtis L. Hoskins
Eduardo A. Rodriguez
J. Frank Bates
John E. Droubay
Russell G. Gibson
Gary R. Hedrick
John C. Horne
Robert C. McNiel
Executive Officers of the Company
Age
46
56
38
44
55
41
39
45
47
Current Position and
Business Experience
Chairman of the Board since May 1989; Chief Executive
Officer since March 1989; Director since January
1988; President from January 1988 to January 1994.
Director since April 1992; President since January
1994; Chief Operating Officer since May 1990;
Executive Vice President from May 1990 to January
1994; Executive Vice President, Utah Power & Light
Company, Salt Lake City, Utah, for more than five
years prior to April 1989.
Senior Vice President since January 1994;
Vice President from April 1992 to January 1994;
Secretary from January 1989 to January 1994;
General Counsel since 1988.
Vice President Customer Services since June 1989;
Assistant Vice President Customer Services from
November 1987 to June 1989.
Vice President and Treasurer since September 1990;
President, Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of
the Board, Energy Mutual Insurance Company and
Electric Life Insurance Company, Salt Lake City,
Utah, from May 1989 to September 1990; Treasurer,
Utah Power & Light Company, Salt Lake City, Utah,
from May 1981 to January 1989.
Controller and Chief Accounting Officer since September
1989; for more than 6 years prior thereto, partner or
member, Coopers & Lybrand (certified public
accountants).
Vice President
Financial Planning and Rate
Administration since September 1990; Treasurer
from 1988 to September 1990; Assistant Vice
President, Finance from February 1990 to September
1990.
Vice President Transmission Systems Division since
August 1989; Group Manager Transmission and
Distribution from November 1987 to August 1989.
Vice President New Mexico Division since December
1989; Assistant Vice President New Mexico
Division from July 1989 to December 1989; Manager
- Energy Marketing from 1988 to July 1989.
38Name
James A. Mayhew
Guillermo Silva, Jr.
Age
39
41
Current Position and
Business Experience
Vice President Rate and Energy Utilization since
September 1990; Vice President Rates &
to
Regulatory
Affairs from August 1989
September 1990; Assistant Vice President - Rates &
Regulatory Affairs from June 1989 to August 1989;
Manager Rates & Regulation for more than one
year prior to June 1989.
-
Secretary since January 1994, Assistant Secretary from
June 1989 to January 1994; and other supervisory
positions with the Company for more than one year
prior to June 1989.
39
The executive officers of the Company are elected no less often than annually and serve at the
discretion of the Board of Directors.Operating Revenues
(In thousands):
Retail:
Residential
Commercial and industrial, small
Commercial and industrial, large
Sales to public authorities
Provision for refund
Other
Wholesale:
Sales for resale
Economy sales
Total operating revenues
Number of customers
(End of year):
Residential
Commercial and industrial, small
Commercial and industrial, large
Other
Total
Average annual use and revenue per residential customer:
KWH
Revenue
Average revenue per KWH:
Residential
Commercial and industrial, small
Commercial and industrial, large
Energy supplied, net, KWH
(In thousands):
Generated
Purchased and interchanged
Total
Energy sales, KWH
(In thousands):
Retail:
Residential
Commercial and industrial, small
Commercial and industrial, large
Sales to public authorities
Wholesale:
Sales for resale
Economy sales
Total sales
Losses and company use
Total
Native system:
Operating Statistics
Peak load, KW
Net generating capacity for peak, KW
Load factor
Total system:
Peak load, KW
Net generating capacity for peak, KW
Load factor
40
1993
December 31,
1992
147,966 $144,059 $
147,418
50,516
74,611
(8.152)
412,359
235,151
23,338
128,157
110,776
3.078
4.982
543,594 524,760
74
3.395
261,958
6,142
637.68 $
142,133
51,108
72,039
10.38g
9.12
5.79
(646)
309
409,002
228,688
22,883
68
3,251
254,890
6,169
636.93 $
10.32¢
9.14
5.61
6,625,162 7,330,004
1.416,172
589 288
8,041,334 7.919.292
1,424,935 1,395,387
1,616,434 1,555,047
872,477
1,034,231
4,948,077
2,484,128 2,361,204
164,559
264,654
1991
130,260
127,504
47,931
65,625
46
3,023
374,389
75,443
12,573
462,405
1,335,000 1,302,000
66.4%
66.4%
223,684
22,417
68
3.156
249,325
6,063
588.11
9.70€
8.44
5.55
6,128,171
1,273.440
7.401.611
1,342,830
1,511,550
911,750
997,483
4,859,667 4,675,096
864,025
956,691
SAMMERH
1,717,850
637,425
7,596,764 7,485,525
444.570
433.767
8,041.334 7.919.292 7,401.611
7,030,371
371.240
997,000
974,000
929,000
1,497,000 1,497,000 1,497,000
62.1%
62.3%
62,6%
1,142,000
1,497,000
67.9%Item 2. Properties
The principal properties of the Company are described in Item 1, "Business," of this report, and
such descriptions are incorporated herein by reference thereto. Transmission lines are located either
on private rights-of-way, easements or on streets or highways by public consent. See Part II, Item 8,
"Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note H of Notes to Financial Statements" for
information regarding encumbrances against the principal properties of the Company,
Item 3. Legal Proceedings
Automatic Stay of Litigation Due to Bankruptcy
Upon the filing of the Company's bankruptcy petition, the provisions of the Bankruptcy Code
operate as a stay applicable to all entities of, among other things, the commencement or continuation
of judicial, administrative, or other actions or proceedings against the Company that were or could
have been commenced before the bankruptcy petition was filed. This stay subject to certain
exceptions-criminal actions and actions by governmental units to enforce police or regulatory powers,
for example, are not stayed. The Bankruptcy Court also has discretion to terminate, annul, modify or
condition the stay.
P & C Lacelaw Trust Litigation
In September 1990, P & C Lacelaw Trust ("Lacelaw") filed suit in the 346th District Court of
El Paso County, Texas, Cause No. 90-10139, against the Company, Franklin, and DDG, Inc. ("DDG"),
the company that purchased all of the capital stock of Franklin from the Company in January 1990.
Lacelaw alleges that Franklin acted in bad faith and participated in self-dealing in connection with
Franklin's management, as general partner, of a limited partnership between Franklin and Lacelaw,
the purpose of which was to acquire, own and operate an office building in downtown El Paso. Lacelaw
further alleges that the Company is responsible for the actions of Franklin because Franklin allegedly
was the alter ego of the Company and that the Company breached fiduciary duties to Lacelaw in
connection with the mismanagement and self-dealing by Franklin and through the sale of Franklin to
DDG. Lacelaw seeks (i) a declaratory judgment that the Company is a general partner in the
partnership; (ii) a judgment declaring Lacelaw's rights as a limited partner; (iii) an accounting of all
financial transactions involving the partnership; and (iv) a dissolution of the partnership. Lacelaw
alleges actual damages of $3.2 million and punitive damages of at least $10 million. The Company
vigorously denies any liability with respect to this lawsuit and believes that the claims are without
merit. Because of the automatic stay imposed as a result of the Company's bankruptcy filing,
investigation and evaluation of the suit by counsel for the Company is in its preliminary stages and
only a minimal amount of discovery has been conducted; therefore, the outcome of the suit cannot be
determined at this time. Lacelaw has filed a proof of claim in the Bankruptcy Case asserting a general
unsecured claim in excess of $3 million based on the litigation, but has not attempted to lift the stay.
Plains Electric Generation and Transmission Cooperative Litigation
On December 12, 1991, Plains Electric Generation and Transmission Cooperative, Inc. ("Plains")
filed suit in the United States District Court for the District of New Mexico, Cause No. CIV91-1199,
against the Company alleging breach of a letter of understanding related to potential option to
purchase up to 50 MW of transfer capability in the AIP if certain enhancements could be made to the
AIP to allow additional transfer capability. Plains seeks specific performance or, alternatively,
compensatory and punitive damages in an unspecified amount for breach of contract, breach of implied
covenant of good faith and fair dealing, breach of the New Mexico Unfair Practices Act, and tortious
conduct for not performing the terms of the letter of understanding. The Company filed an answer and
counterclaim to the action on January 6, 1992, denying all allegations and asserting that any dispute
should be subject to arbitration. The Company denies any liability with respect to the lawsuit and
41intends to defend the action vigorously. Due to the automatic stay imposed as a result of the
bankruptcy filing, no discovery has been conducted in this case; therefore, the outcome of the suit and
potential damages, if any, cannot be determined at this time. Plains has filed a proof of claim in the
Bankruptcy Case for an unliquidated amount. The letter of understanding may or may not be an
executory agreement that is subject to assumption or rejection under the Bankruptcy Code.
Tax Matters
Federal Tax Matters. The IRS filed a second revised proof of claim on February 22, 1993 in the
amount of approximately $53.7 million, consisting of approximately $12.2 million of additional taxes
to be owed for the tax years 1983 through 1989, approximately $24.7 million of interest thereon
through the filing date of the bankruptcy petition, and approximately $16.8 million in penalties. The
proof of claim is based on two examinations conducted by the IRS that are pending at the
administrative appeals level within the IRS. On March 28, 1994, the Company filed a motion and
form of agreed order with the Bankruptcy Court to seek approval of a settlement of the claims of the
IRS in the Bankruptcy Case in the amount of approximately $6.5 million, including interest. Under
the terms of the proposed settlement, the Company has requested approval from the Bankruptcy Court
to pay the IRS currently rather than at the effective date of a plan of reorganization and the IRS has
agreed to reduce the claim by 5%, to approximately $6.2 million. The Company believes, but can give
no assurance, that the Bankruptcy Court will approve the terms of the settlement. The Company has
made adequate provisions for the claim in its financial statements.
Arizona Transaction Privilege ("Sales") Tax. The ADR conducted an audit of the sales taxes paid
on lease payments under the Palo Verde Leases during the audit period of August 1, 1988 through
July 31, 1990. On March 10, 1992, the Company received copies of Notices of Proposed Assessment
(the "Sales Tax Notices") issued by the ADR to each of the taxpayer owner trusts in care of the Owner
Trustee. The original proposed total deficiency assessments, which covered only the audit period, were
approximately $8.8 million, plus related interest thereon. On February 22, 1993, the ADR filed
Notices of Jeopardy Assessment totaling approximately $7.8 million, including interest through
February 28, 1993, to convert the proposed deficiencies for the audit period into jeopardy assessments,
which are immediately collectible. On February 23, 1993 the ADR filed Notices of Tax Lien in the
Maricopa County Recorder's Office and with the Secretary of State of Arizona against the owner
trusts' interests in Palo Verde. Under the Arizona tax statutes, the owner trusts can contest both the
jeopardy assessment and the underlying assessment. Although the ADR can take action immediately
to collect the alleged deficiency from the owner trusts, including collection action and foreclosure on
the owner trusts' interests in Palo Verde, the ADR has taken no action in that regard. The ADR also
may assert additional tax deficiencies for the period from August 1, 1990 through 1991, when the last
lease payments were received by the owner trusts. The Owner Participants have informed the
Company that the ADR has scheduled a hearing on April 11, 1994.
If the Owner Trustee or Owner Participants incur additional tax liability or other loss as a result
of the assessments, the Owner Trustee and Owner Participants may have a claim against the
Company for indemnification pursuant to the participation agreements and leases in the sale and
leaseback transactions. The Owner Trustee and Owner Participants have filed proofs of claim
alleging unliquidated amounts owed pursuant to the participation agreements and leases, which may
encompass claims for indemnification. Pursuant to the settlement agreements entered into between
the Company, the Owner Trustee and each Owner Participant in connection with the Plan, the
Company's indemnity obligations under the participation agreements generally would continue in
effect following the Effective Date, including any claim for indemnification as a result of this matter.
For a discussion of the settlement agreements, see "Bankruptcy Proceedings for Reorganization of the
Company Treatment of Palo Verde," above. If the Owner Trustee fails to contest the jeopardy
assessment or the underlying assessment, the Company would challenge the amount of any
indemnification claim. The Company cannot predict the outcome of the underlying tax dispute or any
claim for indemnification arising out of this matter.
42Other Legal Proceedings
Information regarding legal proceedings relating to the Company's bankruptcy filing,
Palo Verde, Four Corners, rates and regulation and environmental matters is included under the
subcaptions "Bankruptcy Proceedings for Reorganization of the Company," "Regulation," "Facilities"
and "Environmental Matters" under "Business" in Item 1 and is incorporated herein by reference.
The Company is a party to various other claims, legal actions and complaints, the ultimate
disposition of which, in the opinion of management, will not have a material adverse effect on the
operations or financial position of the Company.
Item 4. Submission of Matters to a Vote of Security Holders
Not applicable.
43PART II
Item 5. Market for Registrant's Common Equity and Related Stockholder Matters
The Company's common stock is traded on The NASDAQ Stock Market. The Company's
NASDAQ symbol for its common stock changed from "ELPA" to "ELPAQ" to indicate that the
Company is the subject of bankruptcy proceedings. Under the terms of the Company's listing
agreement with the NASD and the bylaws of the NASD, the NASD may, as a result of the Company's
Chapter 11 bankruptcy filing, apply additional or more stringent criteria for continued inclusion of the
Company's common stock in the NASDAQ system or suspend or terminate the stock's inclusion in
NASDAQ. In addition, because the Company does not meet certain net worth requirements set forth
in Schedule D to the bylaws of the NASD, the NASD may delist the Company's common stock from
NASDAQ. The NASD has not informed the Company of any current intention to implement any of the
aforementioned measures. For a description of the treatment of common stock interests under the
Plan, see Part I, Item I, “Business - Bankruptcy Proceedings for Reorganization of the Company -
Consideration to Shareholders Pursuant to the Plan and Merger Agreement."
The Company has paid no dividends on shares of its common stock since March 1989. The high
and low per share sale prices for the Company's common stock, as reported by NASDAQ, for the
periods during 1993 and 1992 indicated below, were as follows:
1993
First Quarter
Second Quarter
Third Quarter
Fourth Quarter
1992
First Quarter
Second Quarter
Third Quarter
Fourth Quarter
Sale Price
High
$ 35/
44
33/8
33/16
27/6
$ 43/4
37/8
31/12
3
Low
N N
$2
2
27/16
2¹/2
$ 2¹4
27/8
2¹/8
At March 16, 1994, there were approximately 24,447 holders of record of the Company's common
stock.
The Board of Directors voted to suspend payment of dividends and mandatory sinking fund
payments on the Company's outstanding cumulative preferred stock commencing with dividend and
redemption payments due October 1, 1991. Such suspension has continued through the date of this
report. See Part II, Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and
Results of Operations - Liquidity and Capital Resources - Preferred Stock Dividends and Sinking
Fund Payments." The Company cannot predict when the preferred stock dividends and sinking fund
payments will be resumed, but such payments are precluded by the Bankruptcy Code during the
Bankruptcy Case. For a description of the proposed treatment of the preferred stock interests under
the Plan, see Part I, Item 1 "Business - Bankruptcy Proceedings for Reorganization of the Company -
Consideration to Shareholders Pursuant to the Plan and Merger Agreement."
Under the Company's articles of incorporation, as of July 1, 1992, the holders of preferred stock
have the right (subject to satisfaction of certain procedural requirements) to elect two additional
directors to the Board of Directors. This right has accrued because dividends on the outstanding
preferred stock have accumulated and remained unpaid in a cumulative amount at least equal to fourquarterly dividends. If preferred stock dividends in an amount equal to twelve full quarterly
dividends are unpaid, the holders of the preferred stock will be entitled to elect the smallest number of
directors necessary to constitute a majority of the full Board of Directors until all dividends of
preferred stock have been fully paid. Under the Plan, by voting in favor of the Plan, the preferred
shareholders have waived any right to elect a majority of the Board of Directors under the Company's
articles of incorporation.
or
The Company has not received notice of any preferred shareholder's desire or intent to exercise
the right to elect two additional directors and cannot predict whether or when any such action might
be taken. The PUHCA defines a "holding company" as, among other things and except as therein
provided, (i) any company that directly or indirectly owns, controls or holds with power to vote
more of the outstanding "voting securities" of a public utility company or another "holding company;"
or (ii) any person or company which the SEC determines, directly or indirectly, to exercise (either
alone or pursuant to an arrangement or understanding with one or more persons) such a controlling
influence over the management or policies of any public utility as to make it necessary or appropriate
in the public interest or for the protection of investors or consumers that such person or company be
subject to the regulation of the PUHCA. A "voting security" is defined as, among other things, any
security presently entitling the owner or holder thereof to vote in the direction or management of the
affairs of a company. Previously, the shares of the Company's common stock were the only "voting
securities" outstanding. Now that the holders of the Company's preferred stock have the voting rights
described in the preceding paragraph, shares of the preferred stock also may constitute "voting
securities under the PUHCA. Holders of significant positions in the preferred stock (if such shares
titute "voting securities" under the PUHCA) and/or in the common stock could, depend on the
circumstances, be deemed to be "holding companies." Any holder so deemed to be a "holding company"
would, subject to certain exceptions, be required to register as such under the PUHCA and, if such
registration were required, such holder, as well as the Company, would become subject to extensive
regulation under the PUHCA.
45Item 6. Selected Financial Data
As of and for the years ended December 31:
Operating revenues
Operating income
Income (loss) from continuing
operations before
extraordinary item and
cumulative effect of a change
in accounting principle
Extraordinary item
Cumulative effect of a change in
accounting principle
Net loss per weighted average
share of common stock:
Loss before extraordinary
item and cumulative effect
of a change in accounting
principle
Extraordinary item
Cumulative effect of a change
in accounting principle
Dividends declared per
share of common stock
Total assets
Additions to utility plant,
before allowance for equity
funds used for construction
Obligations subject to
compromise
Debt in default
Long-term, financing and
capital lease obligations
Preferred stock -
redemption required
Common stock equity (deficit)
1993
$ 543,594
64,971
(41,855)
(96,044)(3)
(1.18)
(2.70)(3)
1,715,406
58,215
1,495,315
67,266(6)
(357.463)
1992
1991
(In thousands except per share data)
$ 524,760 $ 462,405
67,036
50,722
(28,180)
I
(0.79)
1,702,778 (4)
60,570
1,440,968
67,266 (6)
(220,508)
(266,912) (1)
(289,102) (2)
46
(7.75) (1)
(8.14) (2)
1,566,281 (5)
63,394
1,286,703
67,266 (6)
(191.434)
(5) Decrease from 1990 primarily is due to the write-off of regulatory assets.
(6) Includes approximately $3.3 million of dividends in arrears.
1990
$ 445,309
44,799
(21,864)
(0.96)
1,901,928
80,139
798,111
79,360
371.690
1989
433,470
56,511
1,956
(0.28)
0.38
1,808,802
143,956
(1) Includes approximately $221.1 million after-tax loss attributable to letters of credit draws and approximately
$25.2 million after-tax write-off primarily for regulatory disallowance in Texas Docket 9945.
(2) Reflects the after-tax effect resulting from the discontinuance of the application of SFAS No. 71.
(3) Reflects the change in accounting for income taxes due to the implementation of SFAS No. 109.
(4)
Increase from 1991 primarily is due to increase in cash and temporary investment which results from the
nonpayment of interest and Palo Verde lease costs.
755,761
100,710
404,309
The selected financial data should be read in conjunction with Item 7, "Management's Discussion and
Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations," and Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary
Data," below.Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of
Operations
Overview
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company filed a petition under Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code on January 8, 1992 and
has continued operations as debtor-in-possession. For a number of years prior to the petition filing,
the Company was dependent on external financing through the capital markets for liquidity needs. As
a result of the filing of the bankruptcy case and related cessation or limitation of payments on certain
of the Company's financial arrangements, the Company generated sufficient funds internally to meet
its liquidity needs in 1992 and 1993. At December 31, 1993, the Company had a balance of
approximately $181 million in cash or cash equivalents.
The Company has paid interest at contractual non-default rates on its First and Second Mortgage
Bonds, on its RCF, which is secured by pledged First and Second Mortgage Bonds, and on three series
of pollution control bonds, which are secured by pledged Second Mortgage Bonds, from July 1, 1992
through the current date pursuant to applicable orders of the Bankruptcy Court. As discussed below
in "Obligations Subject to Compromise," and in Part 1, Item 1, "Business -Bankruptcy Proceedings for
the Reorganization of the Company - Treatment of Claims Under the Plan," the Company expects to
continue such payments. As discussed in more detail in Part I, Item 1, "Business - Bankruptcy
Proceedings for Reorganization of the Company - Treatment of Claims Under the Plan," pursuant to
requirements under the Plan, at the Confirmation Date, the Company made interest and periodic
payments at rates and for periods specified in the Plan on additional classes of creditors and interest
holders, together with certain fees and expenses for which payment was provided under the Plan. In
addition, pursuant to the Plan, interest payments will be made to such creditors quarterly and on the
Effective Date and the Company will make periodic payments to holders of its preferred stock
quarterly and on the Effective Date. Through December 31, 1993, such payments or accruals totaled
approximately $40.4 million. The Company estimates the interest and periodic payments will total
approximately $15.4 million per quarter. Taking into account the payments that have been made and
the estimated quarterly payments, as well as expected revenues and projected costs for operations and
capital expenditures, the Company expects its cash balances will decline; however, the Company does
not anticipate any requirement for external financing through the anticipated Effective Date of the
Plan
Obligations Subject to Compromise
In late December 1991, the Company ceased paying principal, interest and fees on portions of its
secured and unsecured debt except as described below. The Company also failed to make lease
payments of approximately $19.3 million on Palo Verde Units 2 and 3 due January 2, 1992. All of the
Company's debt is in default as a result of the events leading to the bankruptcy filing or the filing
itself. The Company expects to remain in default under its existing financing arrangements until a
plan of reorganization becomes effective pursuant to the bankruptcy case. These defaults generally
would entitle the Company's creditors to accelerate the outstanding principal amounts of debt and
pursue other remedies available under the applicable agreements. As a result of the automatic stay
imposed by the provisions of the Bankruptcy Code, however, such creditors generally are prevented
from taking any action to collect such amounts or pursue any remedies against the Company other
than through the bankruptcy case. The terms and provisions of the Company's financing
arrangements, including the maturity dates, are subject to modification pursuant to a plan of
reorganization confirmed in the bankruptcy case.
First Mortgage Bonds. The Company has approximately $299.3 million of First Mortgage Bonds
outstanding. The Company has not made either final maturity principal payment of approximately
47$10.4 million that was due in 1992 or the approximate $7 million in cash sinking fund payments due
in each of 1992 and 1993 under the Indenture of the First Mortgage Bonds. The Company does not
anticipate making the approximate $7 million cash sinking fund payment due in 1994. Additionally,
the Company has not made approximately $18.2 million in prepetition and postpetition interest
payments accrued through June 30, 1992. Pursuant to applicable Bankruptcy Court orders, the
Company is making and expects to make monthly interest payments on its First Mortgage Bonds in
1994. Approximately $30 million of interest accrues annually at the contractual rates on the First
Mortgage Bonds outstanding.
Second Mortgage Bonds. The Company has $165 million of Second Mortgage Bonds outstanding.
The Company does not anticipate making the approximate $8.8 million cash sinking fund payment
due in 1994. The Company has not made approximately $11.7 million in prepetition and postpetition
interest payments accrued through June 30, 1992. Pursuant to applicable Bankruptcy Court orders,
the Company is making and expects to make monthly interest payments on its Second Mortgage
Bonds in 1994. Approximately $20.3 million of interest accrues annually, based on contract rates, on
the Second Mortgage Bonds outstanding.
Pollution Control Bonds. The Company has approximately $195.6 million of tax exempt
Pollution Control Bonds outstanding consisting of four issues, of which three issues aggregating
approximately $159.8 million are secured by a second mortgage. Each of the tax exempt issues is
credit enhanced by a letter of credit. Prior to the petition date, interest and other payments on the
Pollution Control Bonds were made through draws on the letters of credit and the Company
reimbursed the letter of credit bank for such draws. Subsequent to the petition filing, interest on all
the bonds has continued to be paid by draws on the letters of credit. The Company has paid a portion of
the resulting reimbursement obligations to the issuing banks on three Pollution Control Bond issues
through interest payments authorized by applicable orders of the Bankruptcy Court. The Company
has not reimbursed the letter of credit banks approximately $7.3 million in prepetition and
postpetition interest payments accrued and paid through draws on the letters of credit through June
30, 1992 on the three series of Pollution Control Bonds. Additionally, the Company has not
reimbursed the letter of credit bank for approximately $4.0 million in prepetition and postpetition
interest through December 31, 1993 paid on the fourth pollution control issue through draws on the
letter of credit.
In May 1992, one series of the secured Pollution Control Bonds was accelerated and the letter of
credit supporting such series was drawn upon for the principal and accrued interest. The Company
has not reimbursed the letter of credit bank for the drawing, which aggregated approximately
$37.9 million. The Company has been informed that the letter of credit issuer for the accelerated
bonds asserts that the accelerated bonds, which remain outstanding, are held as collateral to secure
the reimbursement obligations of the Company to the letter of credit issuer. No court determination
has been made as to the validity or enforceability of the collateral interest asserted by such letter of
credit issuer. The Company currently is taking steps to amend the governing documents related to
this series of Pollution Control Bonds to allow the Bonds to be remarketed during the Company's
Bankruptcy Case, at the option of the letter of credit issuer. The amendments also would provide for
more flexibility in interest rate features, such as a weekly rate, that would be effective currently, and
a letter of credit issuing bank repurchase option that would be effective at the Effective Date of the
Plan. The Company expects, but can give no assurance, that the actions necessary to make such
amendments will be completed during the second quarter of 1994.
With respect to another series of Pollution Control Bonds, the letter of credit issuer has informed
the Company that such letter of credit issuer has purchased all of the outstanding bonds of that series.
The Company currently is taking steps to amend the governing documents related to this series of
Pollution Control Bonds to allow the Bonds to be remarketed during the Company's Bankruptcy Case,
at the option of the letter of credit issuer. The amendments also would provide for more flexibility in
interest rate features, such as a weekly rate, that would be effective currently, and a letter of credit
48issuing bank repurchase option that would be effective at the Effective Date of the Plan. The
Company expects, but can give no assurance, that the actions necessary to make such amendments
will be completed during the second quarter of 1994.
A third series of Pollution Control Bonds was remarketed during June 1993 and currently
remains outstanding. The final series of Pollution Control Bonds was remarketed in November 1993
and remains outstanding. Both series of Pollution Control Bonds remarketed during 1993 may
continue to be remarketed pursuant to the terms of the bonds. The Company currently is taking steps
to amend the governing documents of the series of Pollution Control Bonds that have been remarketed
annually in June to provide for shorter interest periods currently, which would eliminate the need for
annual remarketings, and to institute a repurchase option for the letter of credit bank that would be
effective at the Effective Date of the Plan. Such amendments may be made by the redemption of the
existing series of Pollution Control Bonds followed by the issuance of a new series of Pollution Control
Bonds containing the new provisions, but otherwise equivalent to the existing series. Such actions
would require the approvals of the FERC and the New Mexico Commission, and the Company has filed
applications seeking such approvals. The Company is attempting to make such changes as of July 1,
1994 in conjunction with the expiration of the current interest period for the existing bonds. The
Company expects to make similar changes to the final series of Pollution Control Bonds, which have
been remarketed annually in November, at the time of the expiration of the current interest period.
The Company may be required to obtain the approval of the FERC and the New Mexico Commission
for those changes.
Because of the pendency of the Company's bankruptcy petition as well as other defaults,
including the failure of the Company to reimburse the letter of credit issuing banks as described
above, the three series of bonds that have not been accelerated are subject to acceleration at any time.
In the event that these bonds are accelerated and redeemed, the tax-advantaged interest rate of the
bonds may no longer be available to the Company.
RCF. The Company currently has a total of $150 million of debt outstanding under its RCF. The
RCF, which involves a syndicate of money center banks, provided for substantially all of the
Company's short-term borrowing prior to the filing of the bankruptcy petition. The RCF became due
and payable on January 9, 1992. The RCF is secured by $50 million of First Mortgage Bonds and $100
million of Second Mortgage Bonds. Interest on the RCF is calculated at the contract non-default rate,
which is the administrating bank's currently quoted prime rate plus 1%. The Company has not paid
approximately $7.9 million of interest accrued through June 30, 1992.
Palo Verde Leases. The Company has not made lease payments aggregating approximately
$201 million on Palo Verde Units 2 and 3 for the period from January 2, 1992 through January 2,
1994. There would be no obligation to make such payments under the Plan. Although the Company
has not been paying postpetition obligations arising under the Palo Verde Leases, except as described
below, the Company has expensed contract rents for financial reporting purposes of approximately
$20.8 million for each quarter.
Fuel Financings. The Company has (i) a nuclear fuel financing of approximately $60.6 million
secured by nuclear fuel and a note payable of approximately $9.8 million; and (ii) a fuel oil financing of
approximately $4.9 million secured by fuel oil. The Company has not made payments of any principal
on the nuclear fuel financing and note payable since the filing of the bankruptcy petition. The
Company also has not made any interest payments on such amounts through September 10, 1993. As
a result of the confirmation of the Plan, the Company paid approximately $1.4 million for interest on
the nuclear fuel financing and note payable from September 10, 1993 through December 31, 1993 at
the interest rate specified in the Plan, which currently is lower than the contract rate. The total
amounts of principal and interest payments that came due but were not paid on the nuclear fuel
financing and the note payable totaled $47.9 million at December 31, 1993. Payments aggregating
approximately $700,000 were made during the second half of 1993 related to the fuel oil financing in
49connection with the sale of a portion of the fuel oil inventory. The Company also paid approximately
$150,000 in interest through December 31, 1993 at the interest rate specified in the Plan for unsecured
debt in connection with the fuel oil financing.
Unsecured Debt. The Company's unsecured debt consists primarily of: (i) notes payable to banks
of approximately $288.4 million associated with draws on letters of credit related to the Company's
sale and leaseback transactions for Palo Verde Units 2 and 3; (ii) a Pollution Control Bond issue of
approximately $35.8 million (on which the Company did not make approximate $1.2 million interest
payments due each of May 1, 1992 and November 2, 1992 and approximate $700,000 interest
payments due on both May 3, 1993 and November 1, 1993, as discussed above); (iii) a term loan note of
$25 million; (iv) a capitalized obligation of approximately $79.2 million associated with the Palo Verde
Unit 2 lease; and (v) a capitalized obligation of approximately $9.1 million associated with another
lease. Prior to the confirmation of the Plan, the Company did not make any payments on the
unsecured debt, except for lease payments on the $9.1 million capitalized obligation. Subsequent to
the confirmation of the Plan, the Company has made interest payments on the allowed claims of
certain classes of the unsecured creditors, as provided for in the Plan and as discussed in Part I, Item 1,
"Business Bankruptcy Proceedings for the Reorganization of the Company - Treatment of Claims
Under the Plan."
Preferred Stock Dividends and Sinking Fund Payments
Under their existing terms, dividends of approximately $1.86 million on the Company's
outstanding cumulative preferred stock are due each January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1 and
mandatory sinking fund redemption payments are due on certain series of the Company's preferred
stock on certain of these quarterly dates. On September 19, 1991, the Board of Directors voted to
suspend payment of dividends and sinking fund payments on the Company's preferred stock,
commencing with dividend and sinking fund payments due October 1, 1991. Accordingly, the
Company has defaulted on its obligation to pay all dividends on all such quarterly dates, beginning
October 1, 1991, resulting in total unpaid preferred stock dividends of approximately $18.6 million at
December 31, 1993. The Company also has missed sinking fund payments in the following amounts:
(i) $750,000 (7,500 shares at $100 per share) due each of October 1, 1991, October 1, 1992 and
October 1, 1993 on the Company's $8.95 Dividend Preferred Stock; (ii) $600,000 (6,000 shares at $100
per share) due each of October 1, 1991, October 1, 1992 and October 1, 1993 on the Company's
$8.44 Dividend Preferred Stock; (iii) $400,000 (4,000 shares at $100 per share) due each of January 1,
1992, January 1, 1993 and January 1, 1994 on the Company's $10.75 Dividend Preferred Stock; (iv)
$10 million (100,000 shares at $100 per share) due July 1, 1992 and July 1, 1993 on the Company's
$11.375 Dividend Preferred Stock and (v) $5 million (50,000 shares at $100 per share) due July 1, 1992
and July 1, 1993 on the Company's $10.125 Dividend Preferred Stock. At December 31, 1993 the total
arrearage of mandatory sinking fund payments is $34.9 million. The Company's aggregate
mandatory sinking fund redemption payments due during 1994, including the $400,000 due on
January 1, 1994, is approximately $11.75 million, none of which has been or is anticipated to be paid.
The Company cannot predict when the preferred stock dividends and sinking fund payments will
be resumed, but such payments are precluded by the Bankruptcy Code during the Company's
Chapter 11 bankruptcy case. Resumption of these payments also will depend on the plan of
reorganization ultimately adopted in the Company's bankruptcy case, which could substantially alter
or eliminate the rights of the preferred and common stockholders. For a description of the treatment
proposed under the Plan, including periodic payments, see Part I, Item 1, "Business-Bankruptcy
Proceedings for Reorganization of the Company - Consideration to Shareholders Pursuant to the Plan
and Merger," and Part II, Item 5, "Market for Registrant's Common Equity and Related Stockholder
Matters."
50Operational Challenges
The Company's major franchises are with the Cities of El Paso, Texas, and Las Cruces,
New Mexico. The franchises grant the Company the right to utilize public rights-of-way and to place
its facilities and structures necessary to serve its retail customers within such cities. The franchise
with the City of El Paso expires in March 2001 and does not contain renewal provisions. The Company
is facing significant near term challenges in connection with certain of its New Mexico customers,
including the City of Las Cruces and the military installations of White Sands Missile Range and
Holloman Air Force Base.
City of Las Cruces
The Company's twenty-five year franchise with the City of Las Cruces expired in March 1993.
The Company and the City of Las Cruces entered into a one-year franchise while they continued
negotiations related to a new long-term franchise. These negotiations have not resulted in a new
franchise and the one-year franchise expired March 18, 1994. The Company has continued to provide
electric service to customers in the City of Las Cruces, consistent with its view that the right and
obligation to serve customers within the City of Las Cruces is derived from the New Mexico Public
Utility Act, as well as other New Mexico law, and not from the franchise. The City of Las Cruces has
acknowledged this obligation in a press release issued March 12, 1994. Sales to customers in the City
of Las Cruces represented approximately 7% of the Company's operating revenue in 1993.
The City of Las Cruces is continuing its exploration and consideration of alternatives for electric
service that may be available to it, including construction of its own distribution system and/or
purchase or condemnation of all or a portion of the Company's distribution system and other property
in the Las Cruces metropolitan area. In March 1993, the City of Las Cruces presented a proposal,
which the Company rejected, to purchase the Company's facilities used to serve customers within the
City of Las Cruces. Nevertheless, in January 1994, the City of Las Cruces issued two requests for
proposals ("RFPs"), one with respect to the provision of a long-term supply of wholesale electric power
and one with respect to operations and maintenance services for a distribution system in the City of
Las Cruces. Proposals in response to the RFPs were due no later than February 28, 1994. The City of
Las Cruces has not announced any decisions related to the RFPs or its intentions with respect to the
development of a competitive distribution system in view of the Company's refusal to sell its
distribution system. The Company did not respond to the RFPs, consistent with its position that the
franchise agreement does not govern the right or obligation to provide electric service.
The Company and the City of Las Cruces are continuing discussions related to the provision of
electric service to customers within the City of Las Cruces. The Company also is considering the level
of franchise fees that should be paid if the franchise agreement is not replaced. The Company believes
that it will continue to provide electric service to the City of Las Cruces for the immediate future,
either under a franchise agreement or without an agreement in place, but pursuant to its right and
obligation under New Mexico law. If the City of Las Cruces and the Company do not agree to a new
franchise agreement and the City of Las Cruces attempts to change the provider of electric service, the
Company will challenge such actions in the New Mexico Commission, the appropriate courts, or both.
Military Installations
The Company is a party to contracts with each of the United States Department of the Air Force
("Air Force") and the United States Department of the Army ("Army") regarding the provision of
retail electric service at Holloman Air Force Base and White Sands Missile Range, respectively,
located in New Mexico. The Company's sales pursuant to such contracts represented approximately
2% of revenues in 1993. The Company's right to provide this service was authorized by the New
Mexico Commission in 1956 by the issuance of a CCN to the Company. The contract with the Army
was due to expire on December 31, 1993 but has been extended by unilateral action of the Army for an
51indefinite period. The contract with the Air Force expired on February 28, 1994. The Company
continues to provide the electric service under state approved tariffs and CCN authority. In 1993 the
Army notified the Company that it intends to conduct a competitive bidding procedure to determine
the provider of this electric service after expiration of the contract, but has taken no further action. On
June 15, 1993, the Air Force issued an RFP to prospective electric utility service providers to provide
electric service to Holloman Air Force Base upon expiration of its service agreement with the
Company. Responses to the RFP were due August 12, 1993. The Company submitted its proposal to
the Air Force on August 12, 1993 and filed a protest to the issuance and terms of the Air Force's RFP.
The protest was upheld, but on technical grounds that have allowed the Air Force to proceed with the
competitive bidding process, although it was delayed.
The Company believes that the procurement of retail electric service by the United States
Department of Defense by such competitive procedures is prohibited by applicable federal
procurement law and that participation by public utilities in such competitive procedures to attempt
to obtain the right to provide this retail electric service would be contrary to New Mexico utility
regulatory law and a violation of the Company's state-authorized right to provide this service. On
April 1, 1993, the Company filed a Petition for Declaratory Order with the New Mexico Commission
seeking, among other things, a declaration that the Company currently is the only public utility
authorized under New Mexico utility regulatory law to offer and provide this particular retail electric
service to Holloman Air Force Base and White Sands Missile Range. This proceeding has been
docketed as NMPUC Case No. 2505. The hearing examiner appointed to the case issued a report
recommending that the New Mexico Commission determine that the case is not ripe for
determination. In September, the Attorney General of New Mexico filed exceptions to the hearing
examiner's recommended decision. The Attorney General has taken the position that the case is ripe
for decision and has urged the New Mexico Commission to declare that utilities may not compete or
contract to provide retail service to existing loads of another utility in a bidding process conducted
outside of a proceeding before the New Mexico Commission. The New Mexico Commission has not yet
issued its decision. Although the Company believes that it is more probable than not that it will
continue to have the right and obligation to provide the retail electric service to the two military
installations, there is no assurance that this will be the case.
On January 4, 1994, the Company filed an action against the Air Force and related parties in the
United States District Court for the District of New Mexico seeking declaratory and injunctive relief,
No. CIV 94-6. The action requests a preliminary injunction against the Air Force's competitive bid
process for electric service at Holloman Air Force Base until the court determines whether the
competitive bid process is contrary to federal law. The action also requests (i) a permanent injunction
of competitive procurement of the retail electric utility service for Holloman Air Force Base from any
public utility regulated under the New Mexico Public Utility Act, and (ii) a declaratory judgment that
the competitive procurement of the retail electric utility service for Holloman Air Force Base
currently provided by the Company from any public utility regulated under the New Mexico Public
Utility Act using competitive procedures based on "lowest net cost of service" is prohibited by federal
law because it is inconsistent with New Mexico law governing the provision of the service by public
utilities. A hearing on the Company's request for a preliminary injunction has been scheduled before
the United States District Court for April 18, 1994.
The Company believes that it will continue to provide electric service to the City of Las Cruces,
Holloman Air Force Base and White Sands Missile Range for the immediate future. The Company
also intends to pursue all available means, including litigation, to retain such customers for the long
term and believes, but can give no assurance, that it will prevail in its efforts to retain such customers
in the long term. If the Company is unable to do so, however, the Company intends to pursue all
available regulatory and legal avenues to obtain the appropriate recovery of its stranded investment
related to such customers.
52Other
On February 8, 1993, Southern Union Gas Company ("Southern Union") filed a request with the
City of El Paso that Southern Union's present franchise to provide gas service be amended to permit
Southern Union to provide electric service. Such proposed service would compete with service
provided by the Company. The City of El Paso has not acted on Southern Union's request. Southern
Union has not applied to the Texas Commission for a service territory CCN or a CCN to construct
facilities, although such CCNs would be required in addition to the requested amendment to Southern
Union's franchise. Currently, the Company holds the only franchise with the City of El Paso to
provide electric service inside the City, as well as the only CCN from the Texas Commission
authorizing electric service inside the City. The Company will oppose any request by Southern Union
for a CCN to provide electric service inside the City of El Paso, but the Company cannot predict
whether a CCN would be granted to Southern Union if one is requested from the Texas Commission or
whether the City of El Paso will amend Southern Union's franchise.
General Industry
In addition to these specific challenges, the Company faces many of the challenges facing the
electric utility industry as a whole, including competitive factors and the costs of nuclear investment
and decommissioning. The level of competition has increased as a result of changes in federal
regulatory provisions related to transmission practices and independent power production, including
cogeneration projects. The Energy Policy Act includes provisions authorizing the FERC to order
electric utilities to transmit power at wholesale at the request of third parties, such as independent
power producers and other utilities. Implementation of these provisions may involve changes in the
method of transmission pricing and increased compliance reporting to the FERC regarding
transmission system availability, State legislatures such as the New Mexico legislature also have
indicated they are considering retail wheeling policies that could result in increases to competition.
The Company believes one benefit to the proposed Merger would be an improved ability to meet these
industry challenges.
Decommissioning costs continue to be significant to the Company. The costs are based on studies
that are updated periodically (generally every three years). The most recent study, dated December
1993, estimates the cost to decommission the Company's share of Palo Verde to be approximately $221
million (stated in 1993 dollars). As of December 31, 1993, the Company has accrued approximately
$30.1 million for decommissioning costs and the balance of funds in decommissioning trusts
established by the Company totaled approximately $15.8 million. The updated studies have
continually reflected increases in costs to decommission as new developments unfold surrounding the
technical and safety aspects of decommissioning a nuclear facility. Although the Company is funding
and recording costs based on the latest information available, there can be no assurances that
decommissioning costs will not continue to increase in the future. Due to delays in the construction of
nuclear waste storage facilities as a result of opposition at the state and local level to the siting of
facilities, the Company may incur additional costs for the construction and operation of temporary or
permanent storage facilities at Palo Verde. See "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data -
Note E of Notes to Financial Statements."
The Energy Policy Act also provided, for an assessment for the decontamination and
decommissioning of DOE's uranium enrichment facilities. The Company has been advised by APS
that, based on preliminary indications, the annual assessment for Palo Verde is expected to be
approximately $3 million for fifteen years, plus increases for inflation. The Company will pay 15.8% of
the annual Palo Verde assessment. The Company accrued $7.1 million for this assessment in 1992 as
its portion of the entire assessment, and paid $400,000 to APS in 1993.
53Results of Operations
The Company recorded a net loss applicable to common stock of $137.9 million or $3.88 per share
in 1993. This compares to a net loss of $28.2 million ($.79 per share) and $564.3 million ($15.89 per
share) in 1992 and 1991, respectively. The principal factors giving rise to the loss in 1993 are
(i) revenues that are not sufficient to recover fully the Company's costs of service and debt service,
(ii) reorganization expenses incurred in connection with the Bankruptcy Case, and (iii) recognition of
the effects of a change in accounting principle for income taxes. Similarly, the 1992 loss resulted from
insufficient revenues and reorganization expenses, including the write-off of debt issuance costs.
Operating results for 1991 are not readily comparable to 1993 and 1992 since prior to December 31,
1991 the Company reported its operating results in accordance with SFAS No. 71. See "Financial
Statements and Supplementary Data - Notes C and D of Notes to Financial Statements." The
Company does not anticipate any significant changes in results of operations prior to emergence from
bankruptcy. See Part I, Item 1, "Business Bankruptcy Proceedings for Reorganization of the
Company - Regulatory Aspects of the Plan."
The primary reasons for increases or decreases in revenues, expenses and other items affecting
results of operations for the year ended December 31, 1993 compared to the year ended December 31,
1992; and for the year ended December 31, 1992 compared to the year ended December 31, 1991 are
discussed below.
Operating Revenues
Approximately 59% of the Company's total revenues for the year ended December 31, 1993 were
generated from sales of electricity to Texas retail customers, principally in the City of El Paso, at rates
approved by the Texas Commission. Sales of electricity to New Mexico retail customers, the largest
portion of which are in the City of Las Cruces and certain military installations, represent 16% of the
Company's total revenues for such period. The balance of the Company's revenues are generated
through: (i) negotiated long-term contracts which are approved by the FERC (16% of the Company's
revenues for such period); and (ii) sales to CFE and economy energy sales which are based upon
current market prices (collectively, 9% of the Company's revenues for such period). Sales to (i)
residential customers; (ii) small commercial and industrial customers; (iii) large commercial and
industrial customers; and (iv) public authorities accounted for approximately 35%, 35%, 12% and 18%,
respectively, of the Company's operating revenue from retail sales. In 1993, IID, a wholesale
customer, accounted for 10.1% of operating revenues. No retail customer accounted for more than 3%
of operating revenues. See "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note M of Notes to
Financial Statements."
Revenues by quarter typically vary due to the difference in climate throughout the year in the
Company's service area, reflecting higher temperatures and rate tariffs in the summer months.
Traditionally, operating revenues during the third quarter (the highest sales quarter) tend to be 20-
25% greater than operating revenues generated during the first quarter (the lowest sales quarter),
54Operating revenues in 1993 were 3.6% greater than operating revenues reported in 1992, while
operating revenues in 1992 were 13.5% greater than in 1991. The changes in operating revenues were
attributable to the following (In thousands):
Base revenues
Fuel revenues
Other
Native system:
Residential
Commercial and industrial - small
Commercial and industrial - large
Public authorities
1993 versus 1992
Native system composite
Sales for resale
Total system composite
$
16,064
15,457
(12.687)
18,834
Base Revenues. The base revenue increase in 1993 is principally the result of (i) increases in total
system KWH sales of approximately 2.9% and (ii) increases in demand and capacity charges to CFE
and increases in capacity for IID. Increases in base revenues for 1992 were largely due to: (i) cash rate
increases of approximately $30 million and $7 million annually, effective August 1991 and September
1991, respectively, which were granted by the Texas Commission in Docket No. 9945; (ii) increases in
total system KWH sales of approximately 13.0%; and (iii) increases in demand charges to IID for
increased capacity.
55
Changes in KWH sales for 1993 compared to 1992 and 1992 compared to 1991 by customer class
are as follows:
1992 versus 1991
1993 versus 1992
$
2.1%
3.9
(4.3)
3.7
1.8
5.2
2.9
60,427
2,233
(305)
62.355
1992 versus 1991
3.9%
2.9
5.5
4.3
3.9
37.5
13.0
Total system firm energy sales increased from 7,220,871 MWH in 1992 to 7,432,205 MWH for
1993. Native system firm sales increased 88,410 MWH over the same time period. The number of
customers from December 31, 1992 to December 31, 1993 increased by approximately 2.8%. The
Company achieved record peak demands in 1993, recording an all-time total system peak load of
1,335 MW on August 11, 1993, which was a 2.5% increase over 1992's record peak of 1,302 MW. The
Company's 1993 native system peak demand of 997 MW, which was also a new record, was a 2.4%
increase from the previous record of 974 MW set in 1992.
As indicated in the table above, and except for the decline in large commercial and industrial
customers in 1993 as compared to 1992, the growth in native system sales is consistent with increases
in the number of customers served. The reduction of KWH sales in 1993 as compared to 1992 to large
commercial and industrial customers results from (i) the temporary cessation and temporary
reduction in operations by two customers and (ii) a reduction in sales to a third customer.
Fuel Revenues. Changes in fuel revenues are generally a function of changes in fuel and
purchased and interchanged power expenses. However, because the Company has recorded a
provision for the sharing of profit from sales to certain customers and economy energy sales, the
increase in fuel costs will not be offset entirely by increases in fuel revenues.Other. The 1993 reduction in other revenues is principally due to the discontinuance of
surcharges (related to the recovery of regulatory expenses) recorded in 1992 of approximately
$11.7 million. In addition, economy energy sales decreased approximately $1.9 million.
Fuel and Purchased and Interchanged Power Expenses
The increase in fuel and purchased and interchanged power expense in 1993 compared to 1992
was due primarily to increased purchased power cost as a result of decreased power production at
Palo Verde and at local gas facilities, and increased unit gas costs.
The increase in fuel and purchased and interchanged power expense in 1992 compared to 1991
was due primarily to increased production at local gas facilities and increased unit gas costs, offset by
decreased unit nuclear fuel costs.
Operation and Maintenance Expense
Operation and maintenance expense increased in 1993 as a result of (i) increased pension and
benefit costs, including an additional expense of $6.3 million in connection with the adoption of SFAS
No. 106 on January 1, 1993 and the recording of approximately $4 million for retirement agreements
with five former officers who retired in early 1994; and (ii) the settlement of certain transmission
disputes of approximately $2.4 million in 1993. These increases were offset in part by (i) decreased
outside services resulting from decreased legal costs of approximately $5 million; (ii) decreased Palo
Verde costs approximately $3.6 million; and (iii) a decrease in bad debt expense of approximately
$2 million.
Operation and maintenance expense increased in 1992 due to increased non-Palo Verde costs
resulting from (i) an additional provision of approximately $3.1 million for uncollectible accounts
associated with three large customers; (ii) the accrual of approximately $1.8 million in connection with
estimated environmental remediation costs; and (iii) increased local plant maintenance costs. The
above increase was partially offset by decreased Palo Verde costs resulting from recording costs
associated with an early retirement plan in 1991 with no comparable amount in 1992.
Depreciation and Amortization Expense
Depreciation expense decreased in 1993 compared to 1992 due primarily to a $7.1 million DOE
decommissioning charge reported in 1992 in connection with the Energy Policy Act, with no
comparable adjustment in 1993. The decrease was partially offset by an increase in the Company's
share of decommissioning expense related to Palo Verde, based on an updated study. For a discussion
of decommissioning costs, see "Operational Challenges General Industry" above and "Financial
Statements and Supplementary Data-Note E of Notes to Financial Statements."
Depreciation expense increased in 1992 compared to 1991 due primarily to the $7.1 million DOE
assessment on Palo Verde and depreciation taken on the Texas portion of Palo Verde Unit 3.
Amortization expense decreased in 1992 compared to 1991 as a result of the discontinuance of the
application of SFAS No. 71,
Federal Income Taxes
The Company recorded federal income tax benefits of approximately $7.9 million in 1993. The
increase in tax benefits in 1993 compared to tax benefits of approximately $4 million recognized in
1992 results from (i) differences in recognizing income taxes under the provisions of SFAS No. 109 in
1993 as compared to APB Opinion No. 11 in 1992, primarily the recognition of the one percent increase
56in the federal income tax rate; (ii) an increase in pre-tax loss, net of non-deductible reorganization
costs; and (iii) other adjustments to deferred taxes.
The Company recorded federal income tax benefits of approximately $107 million in 1991. The
decrease in income tax benefits in 1992 as compared to 1991 is primarily the result of a decrease in the
pre-tax loss, net of non-deductible reorganization costs incurred in 1992.
Taxes Other Than Federal Income Taxes
Taxes other than federal income taxes increased in 1993 compared to 1992 due primarily to the
accrual of approximately $6.2 million for the settlement and anticipated settlement of state income
and other tax claims.
Investment Income
Investment income decreased in 1992 compared to 1991 due to interest received in 1991 of
approximately $2.4 million on an income tax refund and interest of approximately $1 million related
to a note receivable with no comparable amounts received in 1992. Beginning January 8, 1992,
interest earned on accumulated cash balances due to reorganization is reported under the heading
"Reorganization Items" in the Statements of Operations.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net increased in 1993 compared to 1992 due to a gain of approximately $3 million
recognized in the second quarter of 1993 for the settlement of civil litigation.
Interest Charges
Interest charges increased in 1993 compared to 1992 primarily due to payments of approximately
$10.2 million upon confirmation of the Plan to unsecured and undersecured creditors, which interest
had not been previously accrued, and a $1.6 million charge in 1993 in connection with the settlement
and anticipated settlement of state income and other tax claims as discussed above. The increase was
partially offset by a reduction in interest rates.
Interest charges decreased in 1992 compared to 1991 due to the discontinuation of accruing
interest on the Company's unsecured and undersecured debt, and a decrease in the secured long-term
and short-term debt rates. The decrease is partially offset by interest on increased outstanding
balances under the RCF.
Reorganization Items
Pursuant to the provision of Statement of Position 90-7, "Financial Reporting by Entities in
Reorganization Under the Bankruptcy Codė" ("SOP 90-7"), the Company reports net expenses
incurred as a result of the bankruptcy proceedings in a separate section in the statements of
operations. Professional fees and other costs increased in 1993 as a result of additional payments
pursuant to the Plan following the Confirmation Date. In addition, in accordance with SOP 90-7, the
Company incurred a one-time write-off in 1992 of debt issuance cost of approximately $13.3 million.
Cumulative Effect of a Change in Accounting Principle
Effective January 1, 1993, the Company began reporting its financial results pursuant to the
provisions of SFAS No. 109. The standard requires the use of the asset and liability method of
accounting for income taxes as opposed to the deferred method. The Company recognized a charge to
operations in January 1993 of approximately $96 million as a result of adopting SFAS No. 109. The
57charge to operations consists of federal income tax benefits of approximately $153.2 million and state
income tax benefits of approximately $12.2 million, less valuation allowances of approximately
$219.2 million and $42.2 million, respectively.
Preferred Stock Dividend Requirements
The Company has discontinued accruing dividends on preferred stock due to the Company's
bankruptcy filing. See "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note G of Notes to Financial
Statements."
Other 1991 Items
During 1991, the Company recorded an extraordinary item for the discontinuance of the
application of SFAS No. 71, a loss on the letter of credit draws, and an expense for debt restructuring,
all of which did not recur in 1992 and 1993. In addition, after discontinuance of application of SFAS
No. 71 in 1991, the Company no longer records the effects of regulation, and accordingly, certain items
recorded in 1991 are not reflected in 1992 and 1993.
Effects of Inflation
Over the recent past, inflation has been relatively low. As such, its impact to the Company's
results of operations and financial condition have not been significant.
Environmental Matters
For a discussion of environmental matters, see Part I, Item 1, "Business-Environmental
Matters."
Effect of Recently Issued Accounting Standards
See "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note D of Notes to Financial Statements"
regarding the effect of SFAS No. 115, "Accounting for Certain Investments in Debt and Equity
Securities."
58(This page intentionally left blank)
59Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
INDEX TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Independent Auditors' Report
Balance Sheets at December 31, 1993 and 1992
Statements of Operations for the years ended December 31, 1993, 1992 and 1991
Statements of Accumulated Deficit for the years ended December 31, 1993,
1992 and 1991
Statements of Cash Flows for the years ended December 31, 1993, 1992 and 1991
Notes to Financial Statements
60
Page
61
62
64
65
66
67INDEPENDENT AUDITORS' REPORT
The Shareholders and Board of Directors
El Paso Electric Company:
We have audited the financial statements of El Paso Electric Company (a debtor-in-possession as of
January 8, 1992) as listed in the accompanying index.
These financial statements are the
responsibility of the Company's management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these
financial statements based on our audits.
We conducted our audits in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards. Those standards
require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the
financial statements are free of material misstatement. An audit includes examining, on a test basis,
evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. An audit also includes
assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as
evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. We believe that our audits provide a
reasonable basis for our opinion.
In our opinion, the financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the
financial position of El Paso Electric Company as of December 31, 1993 and 1992, and the results of its
operations and its cash flows for each of the years in the three-year period ended December 31, 1993 in
conformity with generally accepted accounting principles.
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming that El Paso Electric Company
will continue as a going concern. As discussed in Note A of Notes to Financial Statements, El Paso
Electric Company filed a voluntary petition for reorganization under Chapter 11 of the United
States Bankruptcy Code on January 8, 1992. The Chapter 11 case is administered by the United
States Bankruptcy Court for the Western District of Texas. The Company is operating its business as
debtor-in-possession which requires certain of its actions to be approved by the Bankruptcy Court.
The Bankruptcy Court has confirmed the Company's proposed plan of reorganization which
contemplates the Company would be acquired by Central and South West Corporation.
Consummation of the plan of reorganization is subject to the satisfaction of certain significant
conditions, including numerous regulatory approvals. Continuation of the Company as a going
concern is dependent upon, among other things, the consummation of a plan of reorganization, the
Company's ability to generate sufficient cash from operations, most significantly its operations which
are subject to regulation of the rates it is allowed to charge as described in Note C of Notes to Financial
Statements, and its ability to restructure or obtain financing to meet its obligations. Further, as more
fully described in Notes B, H, J, and K of Notes to Financial Statements, significant claims beyond
those reflected as liabilities in the financial statements at December 31, 1993 have been or may be
asserted against the Company, The validity of these claims, as well as the amount and manner of
payment of all valid claims, will ultimately be determined by the Bankruptcy Court. These matters
raise substantial doubt about the Company's ability to continue as a going concern. As a result of the
reorganization proceedings, the Company may sell or otherwise realize assets and liquidate or settle
liabilities for amounts other than those reflected in the financial statements.
Further, the
consummation of a plan of reorganization could materially change the amounts currently recorded in
the financial statements, and if no reorganization plan is consummated, it is possible that the
Company's assets could be liquidated. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that
might result from the outcome of these uncertainties.
As discussed in Notes I and L, the Company changed its methods of accounting for income taxes and
postretirement benefits other than pensions, effective January 1, 1993.
El Paso, Texas
March 30, 1994
61
KPMG PEAT MARWICKEL PASO ELECTRIC COMPANY
(DEBTOR IN POSSESSION AS OF JANUARY 8, 1992)
BALANCE SHEETS
Utility plant (Notes C, D and E):
Electric plant in service
Less accumulated depreciation and amortization
Net plant in service
Construction work in progress
Nuclear fuel; includes fuel in process of $9,937,000 and
$16,192,000, respectively
Less accumulated amortization
Net nuclear fuel
Net utility plant
Current assets:
Cash and temporary investments
Accounts receivable, principally trade, net of allowance for
doubtful accounts of $6,004,000 and $4,769,000, respectively
Inventories
Prepayments and other
Total current assets
Long-term contract receivable (Note C)
Deferred charges and other assets
Total assets
ASSETS
See accompanying notes to financial statements.
62
December 31,
1993
(In thousands)
$ 1,650,899
381,309
1,269,590
51,267
93,909
41.948
51,961
1,372,818
181,086
54,652
34,595
10,035
280,368
32,420
29.800
$ 1,715,406
1992
$ 1,620,796
342.527
1,278,269
41,946
105,654
44,559
61.095
1,381,310
162,535
51,896
36,578
11,351
262,360
30.049
29.059
$ 1.702.778EL PASO ELECTRIC COMPANY
(DEBTOR IN POSSESSION AS OF JANUARY 8, 1992)
BALANCE SHEETS
CAPITALIZATION AND LIABILITIES
Capitalization (Notes A, F, G and H):
Common stock, no par value, 100,000,000 shares authorized.
Issued and outstanding 35,544,330 and 35,534,963 shares,
respectively (Note F)
Accumulated deficit
Allowance for pension liability, less applicable income tax benefits
of $476,000 in 1992
Common stock deficit
Preferred stock, cumulative, no par value, 2,000,000 shares authorized:
Redemption required
Redemption not required
Obligations subject to compromise (Note H)
Total capitalization
Current liabilities:
Accounts payable, principally trade
Customer deposits
Other
Taxes accrued other than federal income taxes
Net overcollection of fuel revenues
Other
Total current liabilities
Deferred credits and other liabilities:
Accumulated deferred income taxes (Note I)
Accumulated deferred investment tax credit (Note I)
Deferred gain on sales and leasebacks (Note B)
Decommissioning (Note E)
Total deferred credits and other liabilities
Commitments and contingencies (Notes A, B, C, J, K and L)
Total capitalization and liabilities
See accompanying notes to financial statements.
63
December 31,
1993
(In thousands)
339,097
(696,560)
(357,463)
67,266
14,198
1,495,315
1.219.316
37,032
4,905
21,658
13,874
9.408
86.877
123,935
68,992
142,543
30,101
43,642
409,213
$ 1.715.406
1992
$ 339,078
(558,661)
(925)
(220,508)
67,266
14,198
1.440,968
1,301,924
26,120
4,719
20,374
13,635
14,030
78,878
46,028
74,455
149,575
22,001
29.917
321.976
$ 1.702,778EL PASO ELECTRIC COMPANY
(DEBTOR IN POSSESSION AS OF JANUARY 8, 1992)
STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
For the years ended December 31, 1993, 1992 and 1991
(In thousands except per share data)
Operating revenues
Operating expenses:
Operation:
Fuel
Purchased and interchanged power ...
Other
Maintenance
Depreciation and amortization
Palo Verde deferred costs (Note C)
Phase-in plan deferrals (Note C)
Taxes:
Federal income tax benefits (Note I)
Other
Restructuring costa
Investment income
Operating income
Other Income (deductions):
Allowance for equity funds used during construction (Note D)
Phase-in plan deferred return (Note C)
Regulatory disallowance (Note C)
Loss attributable to letters of credit draws (Note B)
Other, net
Federal income (taxes) benefits applicable to other income (Note 1)
Income (loss) before interest charges
Interest charges (credits):
Interest
Palo Verde deferred costs - carrying charges (Note C)
Other interest capitalized and deferred
Allowance for borrowed funds used during construction (Note D)
Loss before reorganization and extraordinary items and
cumulative effect of a change in accounting principle
Reorganization items (expense):
Debt costs
*********
Professional fees and other
Interest earned on accumulated cash resulting from Bankruptcy case mammamu
Federal income (taxes) benefits applicable to reorganization items
Loss before extraordinary item and cumulative effect of a change
in accounting principle
BATTI*1*
Extraordinary item, less applicable Income tax
benefits of $22,365 (Notes C and I)
Loss before cumulative effect of a change in accounting principle
Cumulative effect of a change in accounting principle (Note I)
Net loss
Preferred stock dividend requirements ($3,725 unpald) (Note G)
Net loss applicable to common stock
Net loss per weighted average share of common stock:
Loss before extraordinary item and cumulative effect
of a change in accounting principle
Extraordinary item
Cumulative effect of a change in accounting principle
Net loss
See accompanying notes to financial statements.
64
$
1993
543.594
$
93,007
39.997
133,004
206,576
39,450
53,050
(10,360)
56.903
478.623
64.971
2,838
(831)
2.007
66.978
82,237
(3,998)
78.239
(11,261)
(35,150)
6,152
(1.596)
(30.594)
(41,855)
(96.044)
(137,899)
$ (137,899) $
(41,855)
(1.18) $
-
(2.70)
(3.88)
$
1992
524,760
90,840
16,858
107,698
204,334
39,351
56,869
(1,067)
50.539
457.724
67.036
754
(343) -
411
67.447
73,176
(3,917)
69.259
(1.812)
(13,264)
(20,194)
3,806
3.284
(26.368)
(28,180)
(28,180)
(0.79) $
1991
462,405
(0.79) $
82,418
18.326
100,744
203,233
31,467
57,926
(18,296)
(1,585)
(10,844)
49.038
411.683
50.722
68
1,719
(30,978)
(10,773)
5,529
(288,416)
696
73.835
(248,320)
(197,598)
92,876
(13,393)
(6,393)
(3.776)
69.314
(266.912)
(266,912)
(289.102)
(556,014)
(28,180)
(556,014)
8.274
(28,180) $ (564,288)
——
mida
(7.75)
(8.14)
-
(15.89)EL PASO ELECTRIC COMPANY
(DEBTOR IN POSSESSION AS OF JANUARY 8, 1992)
STATEMENTS OF ACCUMULATED DEFICIT
For the years ended December 31, 1993, 1992 and 1991
(In thousands)
Retained earnings (deficit) at beginning of year
Add:
Net loss
Deduct:
Cash dividends (Notes F and G):
Preferred stock
Cumulative dividends in arrears:
Preferred stock-redemption required (Note G)
Accumulated deficit at end of year
Weighted average number of common shares
outstanding
See accompanying notes to financial statements.
65
1993
$ (558,661)
(137,899)
(696,560)
1992
$ (530,481)
(28,180)
(558.661)
$
1991
33,388
(556,014)
(522,626)
4,549
3,306
7,855
$ (696.560) $ (558,661) $ (530.481)
35,539,480 35,530,264 35,515,060Cash Flows From Operating Activities:
Loss before extraordinary item and cumulative effect of a change
in accounting principle
Adjustments for non-cash items from operating activities:
Depreciation and amortization
Deferred income taxes and investment tax credit, net
Allowance for equity funds used during construction
Loss attributable to letters of credit draws
Regulatory disallowance
EL PASO ELECTRIC COMPANY
(DEBTOR IN POSSESSION AS OF JANUARY 8, 1992)
STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
For the years ended December 31, 1993, 1992 and 1991
Debt costs
Other operating activities
Change in:
Accounts receivable
Inventories
Prepayments and other
Long-term contract receivable
Obligations subject to compromise
Accounts payable
Other current liabilities
Deferred charges and credits
Net cash provided by operating activities
Cash Flows From Investing Activities:
Additions to utility plant
Allowance for equity funds used during construction
Other investing activities
Net cash used for investing activities
Cash Flows From Financing Activities:
Proceeds from long-term obligations
Redemption of securities
Dividends paid
Redemption of long-term obligations
Net increase in short-term obligations
Other financing activities
Net cash provided by (used for) financing activities
Net increase (decrease) in cash and temporary investments
Cash and temporary investments at beginning of year
Cash and temporary investments at end of year
Supplemental Disclosures of Cash Flow Information:
Cash paid during the year for:
Income taxes
Interest
Reorganization items:
Cash interest received on accumulated cash resulting from
Bankruptcy case
Cash paid for professional fees and other
See accompanying notes to financial statements.
66
1993
1992
(In thousands)
$ (41,855) $ (28,180) $ (266,912)
69,219
78,068
66,901
(24,077)
(4,008)
(84,679)
(68)
288,416
30,978
3,171
(6,097)
(7,501)
(1,787)
(2,756)
1,983
1,316
(2,371)
55,214
10,912
(2,913)
16.637
77,204
(58,215)
409
(57.806)
(867)
20
(847)
$ 17,064 $
64,712
13,264
(1,784)
5,685
29,021
(1,582)
6,090
5,815
(2,850)
101,486
26,119
28,753
5.530
217,872
(60,570)
(60,570)
(788)
30
(758)
18,551
162,535
181,086 $ 162,535
156,544
5,991
32,498
1991
3,361
11,759
13,247
(4,909)
2,916
3,453
(44,963)
5,120
(63,462)
68
1,295
(62.099)
43,133
(15,400)
(4,549)
(118,081)
145,000
745
50,848
(6,131)
12.122
5.991
82,438EL PASO ELECTRIC COMPANY
(DEBTOR IN POSSESSION AS OF JANUARY 8, 1992)
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
A. Bankruptcy and Going Concern Presentation
On January 8, 1992 ("Petition Date") El Paso Electric Company (the "Company") filed a
petition for reorganization under Chapter 11 of the United States Bankruptcy Code in the United
States Bankruptcy Court for the Western District of Texas, Austin Division (the "Bankruptcy Court").
The filing followed an attempt by the Company during 1991 to negotiate a restructuring of its
obligations with its creditors and the draws in late December 1991 on letters of credit related to the
Company's sale and leasebacks of portions of its interest in Palo Verde. Since the Petition Date, the
Company has operated its business as debtor-in-possession, subject to the approval of the Bankruptcy
Court for certain of its proposed actions. On December 8, 1993 (the "Confirmation Date"), the
Bankruptcy Court entered an order confirming the Company's Modified Third Amended Plan of
Reorganization, as corrected through December 6, 1993 (the "Plan"). The effectiveness of the Plan is
subject to satisfying certain significant conditions, discussed below.
As of January 8, 1992, actions to collect prepetition indebtedness or pursue prepetition claims
were stayed and contractual obligations incurred prepetition may not be enforced against the
Company. The Company has rejected certain executory contracts and leases as permitted by the
United States Bankruptcy Code, 11 U.S.C. §101 et seq.("Bankruptcy Code") and claims arising from
such rejections have been or will be addressed through the reorganization process. Substantially all
liabilities as of the Petition Date would be modified pursuant to the Plan, which was approved by all
classes of impaired creditors and equity security holders in the voting process and confirmed by the
Bankruptcy Court on December 8, 1993. (See Note H for a description of estimated liabilities subject
to compromise).
The discussions and descriptions of Company events and the analysis of their potential impact
on financial results herein are premised on the assumption that the Company's operations will be
maintained within existing financial agreements, as modified by the Plan, and regulatory structures
prior to the effective date of the Plan ("Effective Date"). This report must be read with the
understanding that the Plan, which has been confirmed by the Bankruptcy Court, but has not become
effective, will alter, compromise or modify the existing financial and regulatory structures if it
becomes effective. Substantial conditions to the Plan becoming effective exist, as discussed herein,
and the Company believes, but can give no assurance, that such conditions will be satisfied. It is
possible that the Plan will not become effective. If the Plan does not become effective, another plan of
reorganization also would alter, compromise or modify existing financial and regulatory structures.
See "Alternatives to the Plan," below. It is therefore not possible at this time to state with certainty
the nature or degree to which the existing financial and regulatory structures will be altered,
compromised or modified. Accordingly, estimates and evaluations based on the historical results of
Company operations could be subject to material changes as a result of the eventual resolution of the
case commenced January 8, 1992 by the Company in the Bankruptcy Court as Case No. 92-10148-FM
("Bankruptcy Case").
The financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a
going concern. Continuation of the Company as a going concern is dependent upon, among other
things, a plan of reorganization becoming effective, the Company's ability to generate sufficient cash
from operations, most significantly its operations which are subject to regulation of the rates it is
allowed to charge as described in Note C, and its ability to restructure or obtain refinancing to meet its
obligations. Further, as more fully described in Notes B, H, J and K, significant claims beyond those
reflected as liabilities in the financial statements at December 31, 1993 have been asserted against the
Company. The validity of these claims, as well as the amount and manner of payment of all valid
claims, will ultimately be determined by the Bankruptcy Court. As a result of the reorganization
proceedings, the Company may sell or otherwise realize assets and liquidate or settle liabilities for
67
4EL PASO ELECTRIC COMPANY
(DEBTOR IN POSSESSION AS OF JANUARY 8, 1992)
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - (Continued)
amounts other than those reflected in the financial statements. Further, the effectiveness of a plan of
reorganization, could materially change the amounts currently recorded in the financial statements
and if no reorganization plan becomes effective, it is possible that the Company's assets could be
liquidated. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the
outcome of these uncertainties.
The Plan and Proposed Merger
Background. On May 5, 1993, the Company filed the Plan and the Disclosure Statement to
the Third Amended Plan of Reorganization ("the Disclosure Statement"), which provide for the
reorganization of the Company and its acquisition by Central and South West Corporation ("CSW"), a
registered public utility holding company under the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935, as
amended (the "PUHCA"). These replaced and superseded a previous plan which provided that the
Company would remain an independent company. Pursuant to an Agreement and Plan of Merger, as
amended (the "Merger Agreement"), and effective simultaneously with the effectiveness of the Plan,
CSW Sub, Inc., a wholly-owned special purpose subsidiary of CSW ("CSW Sub"), would merge with
and into the Company (the "Merger"), and CSW would become the owner of all of the issued and
outstanding shares of common stock of the Company. On August 27, 1993, the Bankruptcy Court
approved the Disclosure Statement and subsequently the Company solicited the approval of the
various classes of creditors and security holders. At least 92% of those voting in each class of creditors
or holders of interests voted in favor of the Plan. The remaining members of each class will receive the
same treatment under the Plan as those voting in favor of the Plan. On December 8, 1993, the
Bankruptcy Court entered an order confirming the Plan.
Conditions to Effectiveness of the Plan and Merger. The Merger Agreement and Plan
contain numerous conditions to effectiveness, including but not limited to the following described
conditions:
(i) receipt of the regulatory approvals and determinations that, in the judgment of the
Company and CSW, are reasonably required to implement the provisions of the Plan and
consummate the Merger, see "Regulatory Aspects of the Plan and Merger" below;
(ii) the absence of certain occurrences that could result in a material adverse effect on the
Company or the prospects for the business of the Company or CSW;
(iii) performance by the Company, CSW and CSW Sub of all covenants contained in the Merger
Agreement; and
(iv) receipt of an investment grade rating for certain series of publicly tradeable first and
second mortgage bonds of the Company, as reorganized.
Other than certain regulatory or statutory approvals that may not be waived, CSW and the
Company may waive all or any portion of any of the conditions to effectiveness of the Plan and Merger.
Regulatory Aspects of the Plan and Merger. Consummation of the Plan and Merger is
conditioned on receipt of required regulatory approvals, including those discussed below. The
effectiveness of the Plan is expressly conditioned upon obtaining Texas and New Mexico rate orders
establishing certain ratemaking, accounting and regulatory treatments acceptable to CSW, unless
this condition is waived by CSW and the Company.
68EL PASO ELECTRIC COMPANY
(DEBTOR IN POSSESSION AS OF JANUARY 8, 1992)
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued)
Public Utility Commission of Texas ("Texas Commission"). The effectiveness of the Plan and
the Merger is conditioned upon the receipt of the following Texas regulatory approvals and
determinations:
(i) approval of a base rate increase of $25 million for the Texas jurisdiction and
determinations authorizing certain other ratemaking, accounting and regulatory
treatments;
(ii) determination that the Merger is in the public interest; and
(iii) determination that the reacquisition by the Company of the portions of Units 2 and 3 at
the Palo Verde Nuclear Generating Station ("Palo Verde" or "Palo Verde Station") which
are subject to the leases (the "Palo Verde Leases") described in Note B is in the public
interest.
The proposed Texas rate settlement plan offered by CSW and the Company proposes a Texas
jurisdictional base rate increase of $25 million for the Company effective in 1994. Subject to receipt of
that increase and other acceptable accounting, ratemaking and regulatory treatments, the Company
would agree not to seek a base rate increase in Texas to be effective prior to January 1, 1997, and no
more often than every other year thereafter until the year 2001, subject to specified force majeure
events.
New Mexico Public Utility Commission ("New Mexico Commission"). The effectiveness of the
Plan and the Merger are conditioned on the receipt of the following New Mexico regulatory approvals
and determinations:
(i) approval of the Merger and any required authorizations or determinations related to
operating as a public utility in New Mexico after the Merger;
(ii) approval of a base rate increase of $6 million for the New Mexico jurisdiction and
determinations authorizing certain other ratemaking, accounting and regulatory
treatments;
(iii) approval of the issuance by the Company of the securities required for the consummation
of the Plan; and
(iv) approval, required under the New Mexico law on diversification by public utilities, of the
transactions between the Company and CSW contemplated by either the Plan or Merger
Agreement.
Nuclear Regulatory Commission ("NRC"). Approval of the NRC is required for the indirect
transfer of control of the Company's interest in the Palo Verde operating licenses and amendment of
those licenses to delete previously approved sale/leaseback arrangements.
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission ("FERC"). Approval of the FERC is required for the
Company to, in effect, dispose of its interstate facilities through the Merger. Also, the FERC approval
of other transactions contemplated under the Plan may be required, including the issuance and sale by
the Company of new securities and the amendment of the CSW System Operating Agreement to
include the Company as a party. The Company and CSW are seeking use of the transmission system
of Southwestern Public Service Company, an electric utility based in Amarillo, Texas ("SPS"), to
coordinate the operations of the Company and the CSW electric operating companies. The Company
has requested that SPS agree to provide the transmission service and make the system modifications
69EL PASO ELECTRIC COMPANY
(DEBTOR IN POSSESSION AS OF JANUARY 8, 1992)
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - (Continued)
necessary to accomplish such coordination. The Company and CSW have filed a request at the FERC
seeking an order directing SPS to provide the requested service (and make the necessary system
modifications). The Company expects SPS to oppose the issuance of such order.
Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC"). As a registered public utility holding company
subject to the PUHCA, CSW is required to obtain the approval of the SEC prior to consummating the
Merger. Under the PUHCA, the SEC must find that after the Merger the Company and CSW will
constitute an integrated electric system. As noted above, the Company and CSW propose to coordinate
their operations by means of transmission service to be provided by SPS. In the past, the SEC has
determined that integration may be effected by means of transmission rights on unaffiliated systems.
SEC approval will also be required for the formation of CSW Sub, the issuance of CSW common stock
to the holders of the Company's common stock and certain creditors, and the issuance of the
Company's securities to holders of the Company's securities and certain creditors pursuant to the
Plan.
Other Regulatory Filings. The Department of Energy ("DOE") must authorize persons to
transmit electric energy from the United States. The Company holds an authorization to transmit
electric energy to Comision Federal de Electricidad, the national electric utility of Mexico ("CFE").
DOE's approval is required for this authorization to be assumed by CSW.
The Company also must file a notice related to the Merger with the Federal Trade Commission
and Department of Justice pursuant to the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act of 1976.
The applicable waiting period following such filing must have expired before the Effective Date of the
Plan and Merger without an adverse ruling or other action with respect to any anticompetitive effects
of the Merger.
Status and Timing. Certain of the above approvals have been requested and requests for other
approvals are in process. The Company estimates that the process to obtain the above approvals would
require up to 18 months, and perhaps longer. However, the Company can provide no assurance that
all required approvals will be obtained or that the Plan and Merger will be consummated.
Consideration to Creditors and Security Holders. Under the Plan, existing creditors and
existing equity security holders of the Company would receive for their claims cash and/or securities of
the Company, as reorganized, and/or CSW or would have their claims cured and reinstated pursuant
to the Bankruptcy Code. Shares of CSW common stock issued pursuant to the Plan would be subject to
different lock-up periods, during which transfer would be restricted, depending on the class of creditor
or interest holder.
Secured creditors generally would receive value equal to 100% of their allowed claim. Small
unsecured creditors also would receive 100% of their allowed claim. Other unsecured creditors would
receive 95.5% of the principal amount of their allowed claim.
The holders of claims under the Palo Verde Leases related to the bonds issued by two funding
corporations to finance the purchase price in connection with the Company's sale/leaseback
transactions of portions of Palo Verde (See Note B) would have their claims satisfied by issuance of
securities equal to 95.5% of the amount of the allowed claim. The allowed claim is set at $700 million
under the Plan. In addition, the owner participants in the sale/leaseback transactions have entered
into settlements with the Company of the pending adversary proceeding (See Note B) that is
contingent on the Plan becoming effective. Pursuant to settlement agreements, on the Effective Date
of the Plan all claims that were or might have been asserted against the Company by the Owner
Participants or against the Owner Participants by the Company would be dismissed with prejudice by
the Bankruptcy Court. Further, at the Effective Date of the Plan, all obligations of the Company
70EL PASO ELECTRIC COMPANY
(DEBTOR IN POSSESSION AS OF JANUARY 8, 1992)
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - (Continued)
under the Palo Verde Leases and other documents related to the sale/leaseback transactions would be
deemed satisfied and discharged, except for certain specified provisions such as indemnification
obligations, as modified, and all right, title and interest in the property that was the subject of the
sale/leasebacks would be vested in the Company.
Upon consummation of the Merger, shares of the Company's common stock outstanding
immediately prior to the effective time of the Merger (other than any such shares which are held in the
treasury of the Company or owned by CSW or CSW Sub) would be converted into the right to receive
shares of CSW common stock. The conversion would be based on the ratio of the number of shares of
CSW common stock credited to the CSW Common Stock Acquisition Fund (the "Fund") to the number
of outstanding shares of the Company's common stock on the Effective Date of the Plan. The Fund is a
system for tracking the consideration that would be paid to the Company's common shareholders in
the Merger. No cash or shares of CSW common stock are actually placed in the Fund. At the
Confirmation Date, 3,619,794 shares of CSW common stock were credited to the Fund based on (1) a
value of $3.00 per share of the Company's common stock; (II) 35,544,330 shares of Company common
stock outstanding on the Confirmation Date; and (iii) an average trading price of $29.4583 for CSW
common stock on the Confirmation Date. Additional shares of CSW common stock would be credited
to the Fund with value up to $1.50 per share of the Company's common stock outstanding on the
Confirmation Date based on the resolution of certain contingent items described in the Merger
Agreement as tangible and intangible assets and reductions in claims. In addition, shares of CSW
common stock based on the dividends that would have been paid by CSW on the amounts credited to
the Fund from the Confirmation Date to the Effective Date of the Plan will be credited to the Fund.
The closing price for CSW common stock at March 15, 1994 was $26.00 per share. As of March 15,
1994, 3,757,009 shares of CSW common stock have been credited to the Fund.
Pursuant to the Plan, the allowed interests of preferred shareholders would be the sum of the
aggregate amount of the redemption prices of the preferred stock and the aggregate amount of
prepetition dividends. These interests would be satisfied under the Plan by the issuance of securities
having a value in the amount of $68 million. Under the Plan, the Company's preferred stock would be
converted to either preferred stock of the Company, as reorganized, or a combination of CSW common
stock and preferred stock of the Company, as reorganized.
Interim Payments. In addition to the treatment of the prepetition claims of each class of
creditors and security holders, as discussed above, the Plan provides for the Company to make certain
payments at the Confirmation Date and thereafter until the Effective Date of the Plan. These
payments are in addition to periodic interest payments on secured debt that the Company has been
making since July 1, 1992 pursuant to orders of the Bankruptcy Court. The payments were negotiated
as part of the process to achieve approval of the Plan and are intended to compensate certain holders of
claims and interests during the period from the Confirmation Date to the Plan's Effective Date. These
interim payments consist of (i) amounts characterized as interest on unsecured and undersecured debt
and on the claims of the holders of the bonds related to the financing of the Palo Verde sale/leaseback
transactions; (ii) amounts characterized as periodic payments to holders of the Company's preferred
stock, which the Bankruptcy Court has ruled are not dividends; and (iii) fees of advisors and other
expenses of the various classes of creditors and interest holders. The amounts paid under (i) and (ii)
are calculated at variable rates, primarily at 90-Day LIBOR plus 2% (5.3% at December 31, 1993).
To the extent that liabilities and expenses related to these payments have been accrued by the
Company since the filing for bankruptcy, the Company has reduced such liabilities by the interim
payments. Otherwise, the interim payments have been expensed as interest or reorganization items.
Accordingly, amounts aggregating approximately $15.5 million through December 31, 1993, paid to
the Palo Verde Leases bondholders have been offset against accruals which the Company has been
recording on a regular basis; amounts aggregating approximately $10.2 million through December 31,
71EL PASO ELECTRIC COMPANY
(DEBTOR IN POSSESSION AS OF JANUARY 8, 1992)
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued)
1993, paid on unsecured debt for which the Company had not been accruing interest were charged to
interest expense; and amounts aggregating approximately $14.7 million through December 31, 1993,
paid to holders of preferred stock as periodic payments and certain amounts of fees and expenses
charged to reorganization items. The Company estimates that interim payments aggregating
approximately $15.4 million per quarter will be made through the Effective Date of the Plan, of which
approximately $9.2 million would be offset against amounts which the Company has been recording
on a regular basis; $5.3 million would be expensed as interest expense and $900,000 would be
expensed as reorganization items. These amounts are in addition to the monthly payments of
approximately $5 million on secured debt that the Company has been making and expects to continue
to make.
The Plan provides for other amounts to be paid at only the Effective Date of the Plan
representing interest on certain claims and fees incurred by certain classes, which are not included in
the interim payments set forth in the Plan, as described above. These amounts are estimated to
aggregate approximately $14 million at December 31, 1993, of which approximately $11 million has
not been accrued by the Company because it is uncertain if the Plan will become effective. In addition,
certain of the Company's advisors in the bankruptcy proceeding have petitioned the Bankruptcy Court
for "success fees" related to the Plan. The success fees requested to date aggregate approximately
$7 million and if awarded by the Bankruptcy Court would become payable if the Plan becomes
effective.
Termination of Merger Agreement. Each of the Company and CSW have the right to
terminate the Merger Agreement in certain circumstances outlined in the Merger Agreement. In the
event the Merger Agreement is terminated, it shall become void and, other than (i) the possible
payment of a termination fee, by the Company or CSW to the other party; and (ii) under certain
circumstances, the reimbursement to the Company by CSW of certain costs, interest and expenses.
related to the Merger borne by the Company, there is no other obligation or liability on the part of the
Company, CSW or CSW Sub. Termination fees of $25 or $50 million (in the case of any payments due
from the Company to CSW) or $25 million (in the case of any payment due from CSW to the Company)
are payable only in limited circumstances. The amount of the termination fee payable by the
Company, if any, depends on the reason for termination.
Alternatives to the Plan. If the Plan does not become effective, the Company would consider
other alternatives to the Merger including a merger or business combination with another entity or
entities and reorganizing as an independent company. It is also possible that the Bankruptcy Court
would allow a third party to file a plan of reorganization for the Company and such plan could involve
a merger, business combination or acquisition. Although it has indicated it is undesirable, if no other
plan or reorganization is viable, the Bankruptcy Court could order the liquidation of the Company.
Any plan of reorganization other than the Plan would provide for different treatments of the claims of
the creditors and security holders than those set forth in the Plan. The Company cannot predict what
such treatments would be, in what respects actions proposed under the Plan would be modified, or the
amount of time that would be involved before any alternate plan would become effective. The
Company is considering what alternatives would be available in the event the Plan does not become
effective.
B. Sale and Leaseback Transactions and Letters of Credit Draws
In August and December 1986 and December 1987, the Company consummated ten separate
sale/leaseback transactions involving all of its undivided interest in Palo Verde Unit 2, one-third of its
undivided interest in certain common plant at Palo Verde and approximately 40% of its undivided
interest in Unit 3. Pursuant to applicable agreements, the Company remains responsible, during the
terms of the Palo Verde Leases, for all operating and maintenance costs, nuclear fuel costs, other
72EL PASO ELECTRIC COMPANY
(DEBTOR IN POSSESSION AS OF JANUARY 8, 1992)
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - (Continued)
related operating costs of the leased-back facilities, and for decommissioning costs. Under their terms,
the leases related to Unit 2 and Common Plant expire in October 2013, while the leases related to Unit
3 expire in January 2017. All of the Palo Verde Leases contain certain renewal options and provide for
repurchase options, at fair market value, at the termination of the lease. See Note A for a discussion of
the treatment of the Palo Verde Leases under the Plan.
The aggregate consideration received by the Company in the sale/leaseback transactions was
$934.4 million ($684.4 million in 1986 and $250 million in 1987). Nine of the ten transactions are
accounted for as operating leases; one transaction (sales price of $87.4 million) is accounted for as a
financing transaction. For the transactions accounted for as operating leases, the proceeds exceeded
the cost of the assets sold by $194 million, which amount has been deferred and is being amortized into
income, as a reduction to lease expense, over the primary terms of the leases.
All of the Palo Verde Leases and related documents provide that upon the occurrence of
specified events of loss or deemed loss events, as defined, the Company is obligated to pay the related
equity investor an amount in cash (secured by letters of credit) which may exceed the equity investor's
unrecovered equity investment. The Palo Verde Leases also contain provisions related to the
indemnification of the lessors in certain circumstances against certain losses, including the loss of
certain tax benefits, resulting from specified events.
The letters of credit related to the Unit 2 leases had expiration dates of December 31, 1991 and
January 2, 1992. During the second half of 1991, the Company pursued a comprehensive financial
restructuring which would have provided, among other things, for the issuance of required
replacement letters of credit by December 1, 1991, the earliest date required pursuant to the leases.
However, the Company failed to provide the replacement letters of credit by such date. On
December 26 and 27, 1991, beneficiaries holding the letters of credit issued on the account of the
Company in connection with the Unit 2 sales and leasebacks drew and were paid the full available
amount of such letters of credit of approximately $208 million. As discussed in Note A, the Company
filed its bankruptcy petition on January 8, 1992. On January 9, 1992 the beneficiaries of the letters of
credit issued in connection with the Unit 3 sale and leaseback transactions also drew and were paid
the full available amount of such letters of credit of approximately $80.4 million.
As a consequence of the letters of credit draws, the Company incurred direct obligations totaling
approximately $288.4 million to the letters of credit banks. The obligations are unsecured prepetition
claims of the banks (see Notes A and H). The banks are precluded from taking any action to collect
their claim against the Company outside of the Bankruptcy Case and the Company is presently
precluded from paying the amount as a result of the bankruptcy filing. The Company has not made
lease payments on Palo Verde Units 2 and 3 and the non-payment of rent by the applicable grace
period provided in the Palo Verde Leases constitutes events of default under the leases, which
ordinarily would entitle the lessors to various remedies pursuant to the terms of the applicable
agreements, including, rescission or termination of the leases and liquidated damages. As a result of
the bankruptcy filing, however, the lessors are stayed for exercising any remedies under the Palo
Verde Leases except through the Bankruptcy Case. In connection with the Bankruptcy Case, the
lessors and the holders of bonds issued to finance the lessors' purchase of the interests in Palo Verde
have filed proofs of claims that collectively assert damages of approximately $743.1 million.
On September 9, 1992, the Company filed an adversary proceeding against the lessors and the
indenture trustees of the lease obligation bonds. The Company sought a declaratory judgment that
the Palo Verde Leases are leases of real property under the Bankruptcy Code, and therefore (i) the
leases were rejected pursuant to the Bankruptcy Code and (ii) the Company's liability for damages
resulting from the rejection of the leases is limited to approximately $273 million. In addition, the
Company sought a declaratory judgment that its liability for lease rejection was fully satisfied by the
73EL PASO ELECTRIC COMPANY
(DEBTOR IN POSSESSION AS OF JANUARY 8, 1992)
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - (Continued)
proceeds of $288.4 million in letters of credit provided by the Company in connections with the leases.
On December 15, 1992, the Bankruptcy Court granted partial summary judgment against the
Company with respect to one issue on lease rejection damages, holding that the proceeds of the letters
of credit do not satisfy or offset the maximum claim allowable in the event the leases were determined
to be real estate leases. The Bankruptcy Court suspended further consideration of the other issues
related to the proceeding and directed the parties to the litigation to seek a consensual resolution of
the issue. On May 26, 1993, the Bankruptcy Court vacated its partial summary judgment.
The defendants in the adversary proceeding have asserted other claims against the Company,
including claims for prepetition rent, postpetition rent, and fees and expenses incurred in connection
with the Bankruptcy Case. In addition, the indenture trustees have alleged that if the Palo Verde
Leases are leases of real property under the Bankruptcy Code, then the purchasers of the lease
obligation bonds were defrauded by the Company. The Company denies those allegations.
The ultimate impact of this litigation on the financial position of the Company is dependent
upon the terms of the plan of reorganization that becomes effective and the resulting rate treatment
afforded (neither of which can be determined at this time). Accordingly, no provision has been made in
the Company's financial statements. In the absence of a resolution of the nature and disposition of the
Palo Verde Leases, the Company is continuing to accrue the cost of, but is not paying, the contractual
rental rates (see Note H). See Note A regarding the treatment of the Palo Verde Leases proposed
under the Plan and interim payments made to the bondholders pursuant to the Plan.
During 1993, 1992 and 1991, contractual lease requirements including amortization of
transaction costs under the Palo Verde Leases accounted for as operating leases amounted to
approximately $83.1 million, $83.2 million and $84.1 million. Future contractual minimum annual
rental payments required under such leases are as follows (In thousands):
Year Ending
December 31,
Overview
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
Thereafter
The table does not reflect any of the potential effects upon future contractual rental payments
that would result from the Plan becoming effective.
C. Rate Matters
82,757
82,757
82,757
82,757
82,757
1,291,777
Effect of Bankruptcy on Regulation. The Bankruptcy Code provides that the Bankruptcy Court
shall confirm the Company's plan of reorganization only if "any governmental regulatory commission
with jurisdiction, after confirmation of the plan, over the rates of the debtor has approved any rate
change provided for in the plan, or such rate change is expressly conditioned on such approval." To
date, the Company has not asserted arguments in the regulatory proceedings that the provisions of the
Bankruptcy Code, together with applicable provisions of other federal statutes, grant the Bankruptcy
Court the authority to preempt otherwise applicable regulatory authority and processes, and it is
uncertain whether the Company would prevail on such arguments, if asserted. As discussed in Note A
above, the Company or, where appropriate, CSW or APS, have filed or will file applications with
74EL PASO ELECTRIC COMPANY
(DEBTOR IN POSSESSION AS OF JANUARY 8, 1992)
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - (Continued)
various regulatory bodies to seek approvals or findings necessary to consummate the Merger and
otherwise satisfy the conditions to the effectiveness of the Plan. The discussions of the applications
filed or to be filed before the regulatory bodies pursuant to the Plan and the pending regulatory
appeals discussed below in "Texas Rate Matters" and "New Mexico Rate Matters" should be read in
the context of the preemption issue discussed above.
On June 11, 1992, an agreed order was entered in the Bankruptcy Court pursuant to which
appeals in Dockets 7460, 8588, and 9165 (discussed below in "Texas Rate Matters") may go forward in
state court and, upon remand, before the Texas Commission. The agreed order provided that it was
not a determination of the applicability of the automatic stay in bankruptcy as to any other regulatory
appeal or a determination of the jurisdiction of the Bankruptcy Court or any other court or regulatory
authority with respect to the Company's rates or service. On September 20, 1993, the Bankruptcy
Court entered an order lifting the automatic stay in the appeals of the Company's other Texas rate
proceedings, consisting of Dockets 9945, 8018, 8078, 8363, and 9069 (discussed below in "Texas Rate
Matters").
Texas. The rates and services of the Company in Texas municipalities are regulated by those
municipalities and in unincorporated areas by the Texas Commission. The largest municipality in the
Company's service area in Texas is the City of El Paso. The Texas Commission has exclusive de novo
appellate jurisdiction to review municipal orders and ordinances regarding rates and services, and its
decisions are subject to judicial review.
The Texas Commission has jurisdiction to grant and amend certificates of convenience and
necessity ("CCN") for service territory and certain facilities, including generation and transmission
facilities. Although the Texas Commission does not have the authority to approve transfers of utility
assets, it is required to evaluate certain transfers of utility assets and mergers and consolidations of
regulated utility companies to determine if those transactions are consistent with the public interest.
Upon a finding that such a transaction is not in the public interest, the Texas Commission is required
to consider the effects of the transaction in future ratemaking proceedings and is required to disallow
the effects of the transaction if it will unreasonably affect rates or service.
New Mexico. The New Mexico Commission has jurisdiction over the Company's rates and
services in New Mexico. The New Mexico Commission must grant prior approval of the issuance,
assumption or guarantee of securities; the creation of liens on property located within the state; the
consolidation, merger or acquisition of some or all of the stock of another utility; and the sale, lease,
rental, purchase or acquisition of any public utility plant or property constituting all or part of an
operating unit or system. The New Mexico Commission also has jurisdiction as to the valuation of
utility property and business; certain extensions, improvements and additions; Class I and II
transactions (as defined by the New Mexico Public Utility Act); abandonment of facilities and the
certification and decertification of utility plant.
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. The Company is subject to regulation by the FERC in
certain matters, including rates for wholesale power sales and the issuance of securities. In 1992, the
Congress enacted the Energy Policy Act, which, among other things, removes certain restrictions on
utility participation in the competitive wholesale generation market. In addition, subject to certain
limitations, the legislation provides that the FERC also may order electric utilities, including the
Company, to provide certain transmission services. The legislation also expands the authority of state
utility commissions to examine the books and records of electric utilities.
Nuclear Regulatory Commission. The Palo Verde Station is subject to the jurisdiction of the
NRC, which has authority to issue permits and licenses, to regulate nuclear facilities in order to
protect the health and safety of the public from radiation hazards and to conduct environmental
75EL PASO ELECTRIC COMPANY
(DEBTOR IN POSSESSION AS OF JANUARY 8, 1992)
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - (Continued)
reviews pursuant to the National Environmental Policy Act. Before any nuclear power plant can
become operational, an operating license from the NRC is required. The NRC has granted facility
operating licenses for Unit 1, Unit 2 and Unit 3 at Palo Verde for terms of forty years each, beginning
December 31, 1984, December 9, 1985 and March 25, 1987, respectively. Full power operating licenses
for Units 1, 2 and 3 were issued by the NRC in June 1985, April 1986 and November 1987,
respectively. In addition, the Company (along with the other Palo Verde Participants other than APS)
is separately licensed by the NRC to own its proportionate share thereof. On January 13, 1994, APS,
as Operating Agent of Palo Verde, joined by the Company, filed a request with the NRC (i) for consent
to the indirect transfer of the Company's possession and ownership in the Operating Licenses for Palo
Verde Units 1, 2 and 3 that will occur as a result of the merger of a special-purpose subsidiary of CSW
with and into the Company; and (ii) to amend the Operating Licenses for Units 2 and 3 to delete
provisions of those licenses related to the Company's sale and leaseback transactions involving those
units. The request to the NRC specifies that the requested amendments to the Operating Licenses and
consent become effective on the Effective Date, upon notification by the applicants that all necessary
regulatory approvals have been obtained, but the Company cannot predict at this time whether and
when the approvals and consent will be granted. See Note A above.
Accounting for the Effects of Regulation. Prior to December 31, 1991, the financial statements of
the Company were prepared pursuant to the provisions of Financial Accounting Standards Board
("FASB") Statement of Financial Accounting Standards ("SFAS") No. 71, as amended, "Accounting for
the Effects of Certain Types of Regulation," which provides for the recognition of the economic effects
of regulation. In early 1992, the Company determined that there existed substantial doubt concerning
whether the criteria for reflecting the economic effects of regulation continued to be met as a result of
continuing cash flow problems arising from inadequate rate relief and the uncertainty surrounding
regulation during the reorganization process, including the regulatory treatment, if any, of the
$288.4 million letters of credit draws. The Company concluded that it was not reasonable to assume
that its rates were, or will be, without giving consideration to possible outcomes of the reorganization
process, designed to recover its costs on a timely basis. Because of the uncertainty of the nature of any
reorganization plan ultimately consummated and the assessment of the nature of regulation, the
Company concluded that it did not then and does not currently have sufficient assurance to reflect the
economic effects of regulation in its general purpose financial statements. Therefore, as required by
generally accepted accounting principles, the Company eliminated from its 1991 balance sheet the
aggregate effects of regulation, which resulted in $311 million extraordinary charge to results of
operations for the year ended December 31, 1991. This amount included approximately $200 million
of operating expenses primarily related to Palo Verde and approximately $80 million of income taxes
related to the Palo Verde sale/leaseback transactions which had been deferred by the Company's
regulators for recovery in future periods. Furthermore, the Company did not record the letter of credit
draws amounting to $288.4 million as an asset and has not recorded any new assets reflecting the
economic effects of regulation since 1991 in its general purpose financial statements.
Although the outcome of the reorganization process cannot presently be determined, the
Company believes that the rates established in conjunction with any reorganization plan will be
designed to recover the Company's costs, including a return on equity, after the establishment of an
appropriate capital structure, as well as to reflect other changes that may result from the
reorganization. The Company expects that, upon effectiveness of any plan of reorganization, its
regulated operations will meet the SFAS No. 71 criteria necessary to reflect the effects of regulation in
its general purpose financial statements. Such rates may include the recovery of some or all items
that, at that time, are not reflected as regulatory assets on the Company's general purpose financial
statements. However, in the absence of application of purchase accounting applied in the event of a
change in control occurring as part of the reorganization, there does not appear to be any applicable
accounting precedent for the restoration of such amounts as assets created prior to the re-adoption of
SFAS No. 71. Restoration of such amounts as assets will depend upon a number of factors, including
76EL PASO ELECTRIC COMPANY
(DEBTOR IN POSSESSION AS OF JANUARY 8, 1992)
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS. (Continued).
intervening developments in accounting standards and other accounting literature, the outcome of
which cannot currently be determined. In March 1993, the Financial Accounting Standards Board's
Emerging Issues Task Force reached a consensus that if a rate-regulated enterprise initially fails to
meet the regulatory asset recognition requirements of SFAS No. 71, but meets those requirements in a
subsequent period, then regulatory assets should be recognized in the period the requirements are
met. Although the Emerging Issues Task Force's consensus applied to rate-regulated enterprises
currently meeting the requirements of SFAS No. 71, the Company believes that this consensus
supports the Company's position regarding restoring previous net regulatory assets in its general
purpose financial statements. In the event it is concluded that such restoration is not appropriate
under generally accepted accounting principles, the Company would be precluded from recognizing
historical amounts as regulatory assets in its general purpose financial statements. If it is determined
that such restoration is appropriate, regulatory assets would be recorded to the extent items allowed to
be recovered in the rate making process have not been reflected as assets in the Company's general
purpose financial statements.
Texas Rate Matters
Rate Moderation Plan - Palo Verde Units 1 and 2. In 1988 the Texas Commission established a
rate moderation plan in Docket 7460 based on a contested stipulation, pursuant to which the Texas
jurisdictional portion of the Company's investment in Palo Verde Unit 1, Common Plant, and lease
payments on Unit 2 (to the extent of approximately 83% of those lease payments) were to be phased-in
to rates in four steps. The order in Docket 7460 also settled all issues concerning the prudence of the
Company's initial decision to participate in Palo Verde and all issues concerning prudence in the
construction of Units 1 and 2. (The prudence of the Company's decision to continue its investment in
Unit 3 after 1978 and the prudence in the construction of Unit 3 were the subject of Docket 9945,
discussed below.) The Docket 7460 order was upheld by the Texas Court of Appeals for the
3rd Judicial District at Austin, Texas (the "Court of Appeals"), on August 26, 1992, except for a
determination that deferred carrying costs may not be included in rate base. The case has been
appealed to the Texas Supreme Court by the Company and other parties. See discussion below under
"Deferred Accounting Cases."
The first base rate increase contemplated under the rate moderation plan was ordered in
Docket 7460, and the remaining three increases were sought and ordered in subsequent rate filings
(Dockets 8363, 9165, and 9945). As a result of these filings, the Texas Commission has allowed
periodic rate increases which allow the Company to recover some, but not all, of its revenue
requirements associated with its investment in Units 1 and 2 (as established in these rate cases), and
the Company has been permitted to defer those unrecovered revenue requirements on its regulatory
books of account for collection in later years. In Docket 9945, the Texas Commission limited each
future base rate increase intended to recover those deferrals to 3.5%. In connection with the
Company's discontinuation of reporting under SFAS No. 71 as of December 31, 1991, approximately
$46.1 million of "phase-in deferrals" previously recorded pursuant to this plan have been eliminated
from the Company's general purpose financial statements and reported as part of the extraordinary
charge to results of operations for the year ended December 31, 1991.
Dockets 8363 and 9165 have been appealed to the Texas District Court, where the appeals
remain pending. A hearing on the appeal of Docket 8363 has been scheduled for July 1994. No
hearing on the appeal of Docket 9165 has been scheduled. The outcome of these appeals and the
results or materiality of final dispositions of these cases presently cannot be determined.
Docket 9945. On December 28, 1990, the Company filed with the Texas Commission a combined
request for the scheduled fourth base rate increase under the Docket 7460 rate moderation plan
discussed above and for the recovery, also on a moderated basis, of the Texas jurisdictional portion of
77EL PASO ELECTRIC COMPANY
(DEBTOR IN POSSESSION AS OF JANUARY 8, 1992)
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued)
the Company's investment in Palo Verde Unit 3, including the lease payments, net of deferred gain, on
the Company's sales and leasebacks of a portion of its interest in Unit 3. The Company's combined
request was for $131.3 million, which included approximately $49 million related to the Units 1 and 2
rate moderation plan and approximately $82.3 million related to Unit 3. Of the total request,
approximately $38 million was to be in cash with the balance deferred for subsequent recovery.
The Texas Commission issued its final order in Docket 9945 on November 12, 1991, approving a
total increase in Texas base revenues of approximately $47 million, consisting of $37 million in cash
and $10 million of phase-in deferrals. The order approved a cash increase of approximately $7 million
as the fourth increase under the Units 1 and 2 rate moderation plan with a phase-in deferral of $10
million for future recovery in rates. The order limited each future increase in base rates under the
Units 1 and 2 plan to 3.5%, but also approved a regulatory non-cash revenue adjustment recommended
by the Hearing Examiners, which was necessary to provide for full recovery of the phase-in deferrals
during the remaining term of the Units 1 and 2 rate moderation plan. The balance of the $37 million
cash increase (approximately $30 million) represented operating and maintenance expenses,
decommissioning expenses and ad valorem taxes on Unit 3 of Palo Verde, as well as an allowance for
purchased power capacity. The balance did not include any current return of or return on the owned
portion of Unit 3 or recovery of the lease expenses related to Unit 3. Recovery of these costs has been
held in abeyance to be included subsequently in Texas rates over a scheduled period of time, as
discussed below.
The Texas Commission disallowed approximately $32 million of Unit 3 capitalized costs, on a
total Company basis, as imprudently incurred. The order also disallowed $9.8 million, on a total
Company basis, of previously deferred costs related to the 1989-90 outages of Units 1 and 2. The
Company recorded pre-tax write-offs of $24.1 million and $6.3 million, respectively (the Texas
jurisdictional amounts of these disallowances), in results of operations in the third quarter of 1991,
With respect to the rate treatment of Unit 3, the Texas Commission adopted an inventory plan,
pursuant to which the Company's investment in Unit 3 was neither included in rates nor expressly
disallowed, but instead held in abeyance to be included subsequently in Texas rates over a scheduled
period of time. In justifying the inventory plan, the Texas Commission found (i) the Company was
imprudent in not attempting to sell a portion of its interest in Palo Verde between 1978 and 1981;
(ii) the Company failed to demonstrate that it would not have been unable to sell such interest if it had
attempted to do so; and (iii) as a result of such imprudent action, the addition of Unit 3 to the
Company's system would result in excess capacity. However, the Texas Commission further found
that Unit 3 would become "used and useful" to the Texas jurisdiction in the following percentages: 0%
(in Docket 9945), and 40%, 65%, 85% and 100% thereafter. It is the Company's position that the
successive phases of the inventory plan were to be implemented on an annual basis; however, other
parties may contest that position. Other parties also may contest whether the inventory plan
constituted a proper determination by the Texas Commission of when Unit 3 would become used and
useful. During the period Unit 3 is held in inventory, the Company will recover the operating and
maintenance expenses, decommissioning expenses and ad valorem taxes associated with Unit 3, along
with an allowance for purchased power capacity. Pursuant to the order, but subject to possible
changes that could result from an effective reorganization plan, the Company expects to recover, in
future years, the following at the applicable inventoried percentages: a return of and on the plant
costs associated with the owned portions of Unit 3 and the amount of lease payments due under the
sale/leaseback transactions the Company entered into in connection with Unit 3. Under the order, the
Company will retain the benefits of its sales to CFE for at least the period covered by the first rate
order under the inventory plan.
78
AEL PASO ELECTRIC COMPANY
(DEBTOR IN POSSESSION AS OF JANUARY 8, 1992)
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - (Continued)
The Company disputes there was any imprudence, either in connection with the Unit 3
capitalized costs or in retaining its full investment in Palo Verde. The Company challenged both
aspects of the Texas Commission's order in the Company's Motions for Rehearing and has continued
such challenges on appeal. The Company filed an appeal with the Texas District Court on April 21,
1992. The City of El Paso and two intervenors also appealed. On October 27, 1993, the Texas District
Court affirmed the final order of the Texas Commission except in two respects. The Texas District
Court held the Texas Commission erred (i) by refusing to include certain disallowed utility expenses as
deductions when computing federal income tax expense for ratemaking purposes and (ii) by granting
rate base treatment for post-in-service deferred carrying costs associated with Palo Verde. The second
holding is consistent with the decision of the Texas Court of Appeals in Docket 7460, discussed below
under "Deferred Accounting Cases." The Company has appealed the decision, as have the City of
El Paso and the two intervenors who were parties to the appeal before the Texas District Court. The
ultimate outcome of the appeals and their results or the materiality thereof cannot be predicted at this
time.
Deferred Accounting Cases. The Company has received a series of orders authorizing the deferral
of operating costs incurred, and carrying charges accrued, on each unit of Palo Verde between the
unit's in-service date and the date of its inclusion in Texas rates. Certain orders have also permitted
the Company to include in rate base and amortize the deferred costs over the lives of Units 1 and 2
(approximately 40 years for ratemaking purposes). All of these "deferred accounting orders" have
been appealed. The ultimate outcome of these appeals and their results or the materiality thereof
cannot be predicted by the Company at this time.
The deferred accounting order in Docket 7460 (regarding Units 1 and 2) has been the subject of
two rulings by the Court of Appeals and is currently pending before the Texas Supreme Court. In its
first ruling on August 14, 1991, the Court of Appeals held that none of the deferred costs could be
included in rate base. As a result of that ruling, the Company discontinued deferring for financial
reporting purposes Unit 3 operating and maintenance expenses and related carrying costs as of July 1,
1991. The Company and other parties filed Motions for Rehearing, in response to which the Court of
Appeals issued a subs uent ruling on August 26, 1992, holding that deferred operating costs may be
placed in rate base. Although the Court of Appeals maintained its position that deferred carrying
costs may not be included in rate base, it stated that its opinion did not preclude the recovery of
carrying costs without rate base treatment. This would allow recovery of the carrying costs, but might
not allow the Company to earn a return on the unamortized balance of those carrying costs. The
Company estimates that the amount of return on such carrying costs previously included in revenue
requirements authorized by the Texas Commission, on an unmoderated basis, is approximately
$33.4 million as of March 31, 1994. The Texas Supreme Court granted writ of error with respect to the
issue of the propriety of deferred accounting orders and heard oral argument on the case on
September 13, 1993 (along with three similar appeals involving other Texas electric utilities). The
Texas Supreme Court has not issued its ruling on the appeals. If the Court of Appeals' decision is
upheld by the Texas Supreme Court and remanded to the Texas Commission, it is possible that the
return on the deferred carrying costs will not be refunded, but will instead be offset against the
balance of unamortized phase-in deferrals. It is also possible that the Texas Commission could find
that the inability to earn a return on deferred carrying costs has increased the Company's risk and
could, correspondingly, adjust the Company's allowed rate of return such that the previously
determined total revenue requirement would remain unchanged.
In connection with the Company's elimination of net regulatory assets from its balance sheet as
of December 31, 1991, approximately $94 million of Units 1 and 2 accounting deferrals and
$60.3 million of Unit 3 accounting deferrals have been eliminated and reported as part of the
extraordinary charge to results of operations for the year ended December 31, 1991. If the Court of
79EL PASO ELECTRIC COMPANY
(DEBTOR IN POSSESSION AS OF JANUARY 8, 1992)
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued)
Appeals decision is upheld and assuming no refund will be required (as discussed above), there will be
no additional write-offs required in the Company's general purpose financial statements.
Rate Case Expenses Incurred in Docket 7460. The issue of recovery of expenses incurred by the
Company and the City of El Paso in connection with Docket 7460 was severed from the issues ruled
upon by the Texas Commission in that Docket and was assigned to a new Docket 8018 for
consideration. On September 20, 1991, the Texas Commission issued its final order in the case and
approved the reimbursement of approximately $10.8 million for expenses incurred by the Company
and approximately $1.1 million for expenses incurred by the City of El Paso. The Texas Commission
further directed that such amounts be surcharged to the Company's Texas customers over a one-year
period, which the Company completed in November 1992. The City of El Paso filed an appeal of the
Texas Commission's order in Docket 8018 with the Texas District Court, and oral arguments were
held March 18, 1994. After hearing arguments, the Texas District Court affirmed the Texas
Commission's decision. Further appeals by the City of El Paso are possible. The ultimate outcome of
any such appeal and its result or the materiality thereof cannot be predicted at this time.
"
In connection with the Company's elimination of net regulatory assets from its balance sheet as
of December 31, 1991, the unrecovered balance of all rate case expenses previously deferred, including
cases other than Docket 7460, was eliminated. The Company expects that all of these costs ultimately
will be collected in full from its Texas customers.
Texas Recognition of Palo Verde Sales and Leasebacks. In its Docket 8363 order and a separate
order issued in August 1989 (Docket 8078), the Texas Commission found the Company's Unit 2 and
Unit 3 sales and leasebacks to be in the public interest. The rulings, if upheld on appeal, would ensure
that the Texas Commission will consider those transactions in connection with the Company's rate
cases. The finding on the Unit 2 sales and leasebacks, in addition to findings regarding federal income
tax expense and other ratemaking issues, is a part of the City of El Paso's appeal of the Docket 8363
order. The City of El Paso appealed the Texas Commission's order in Docket 8078 with respect to the
Unit 3 transactions to the Texas District Court. A hearing on the appeal of Docket 8078 has been
scheduled for August 1994. While the Company believes that the Texas District Court will uphold the
Texas Commission's orders, the ultimate outcomes of the appeals and their results or the materiality
thereof cannot be predicted with certainty at this time.
Performance Standards for Palo Verde. In 1991, the Texas Commission established performance
standards in Docket 8892 for the operation of the Palo Verde units. Each Palo Verde unit included in
Texas rates is evaluated annually to determine if its three-year rolling average capacity factor entitles
the Company to a reward or a penalty. There are five performance bands based around a target
capacity factor of 70%. Neither a penalty nor a reward would result from capacity factors from 62.5%
to 77.5%. Capacity factors are calculated as the ratio of actual generation to maximum possible
generation. If the capacity factor for any unit is 35% or less, the Texas Commission is required to
initiate a proceeding to determine whether such unit should continue to be included in rate base.
The performance standards are effective as of the date each unit is included in Texas rates, which
was April 22, 1988 for Units 1 and 2. In June 1993, the Company filed its third annual performance
report with the Texas Commission. The Company incurred neither a penalty nor a reward for the
1993 report. The three-year capacity factor was 72.9% for Unit 1 and 75.2% for Unit 2. The Company
expects the report to be filed with the Texas Commission in 1994 to reflect performance for Units 1 and
2 resulting in neither a penalty nor a reward, though the projected capacity factor for Unit 2 is
projected to be only slightly above the point at which a penalty could be incurred.
Recovery of Fuel Expenses. The Company recovers fuel and purchased power costs from its Texas
customers pursuant to a fixed fuel factor established by the Texas Commission. Fuel revenues
80EL PASO ELECTRIC COMPANY
(DEBTOR IN POSSESSION AS OF JANUARY 8, 1992)
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - (Continued)
collected under the fixed fuel factor must be periodically reconciled to costs allowed by the Texas
Commission. The Company's last reconciliation, Docket 8588, was for the period August 1, 1985
through March 31, 1989, and involved over $200 million in Texas fuel costs. The final order issued in
1990 required a refund of approximately $7.1 million, plus interest, which the Company completed
over a twelve-month period beginning in February 1991. The Company and the City of El Paso
appealed the Texas Commission's order in Docket 8588 to the Texas District Court. On November 25,
1991, the Texas District Court entered judgment on the appeals, upholding the Texas Commission's
order on all points except the Company's appeal of the treatment of certain purchased power capacity
costs during 1985-86. With regard to those costs, totaling approximately $4.2 million, the Texas
District Court held that the Texas Commission erred in failing to justify adequately its decision not to
allow the Company to recover such costs through its reconcilable fuel account. The Texas District
Court remanded the case to the Texas Commission with instructions to reconsider the allowance of
such costs. Both the Texas Commission and the City of El Paso appealed the Texas District Court's
decision to the Court of Appeals. On March 10, 1993, the Court of Appeals affirmed the decision of the
Texas District Court. On February 2, 1994, the Texas Supreme Court denied the applications for writ
of error filed by the City of El Paso and the Texas Commission. The case will be remanded to the Texas
Commission for a new hearing to address whether the Company should be allowed to include the
purchased power capacity charges as reconcilable fuel costs and recover such costs. The ultimate
outcome of this hearing cannot be predicted at this time.
On January 26, 1993, the Texas Commission adopted a new fuel rule allowing for adjustment of
the fixed fuel factor every six months on a prescribed schedule and requiring reconciliation of fuel
costs and revenues whenever three years of fuel data have accumulated. Under the new rule, both
refunds and surcharges are allowed without changing the fixed fuel factor where the cumulative over-
or under-recovered fuel balance, including interest, is greater than or equal to 4% of the estimated
annual fuel costs adopted most recently by the Texas Commission. The Texas Commission is required
to act on a petition to change a fixed fuel factor within sixty or ninety days, depending on whether a
hearing is required. The Company is allowed under the prescribed schedule to petition for a change in
its Texas fixed fuel factor in January and July of each year under the new rule.
Ratemaking Treatment of Federal Income Taxes. In a 1987 case involving an electric utility, the
Texas Supreme Court determined that, under certain circumstances, it is appropriate to allow only
"actual taxes incurred" for ratemaking purposes. The Court of Appeals has applied the Texas
Supreme Court decision to another utility. Public Utility Commission of Texas v. GTE-Southwest,
833 S.W.2d 153 (Tex. App. - Austin 1992, writ granted). The Texas Supreme Court heard oral
argument in that case in September 1993 and has not ruled yet.
Additionally, the Texas Commission has recently applied various forms of the "actual taxes
incurred" methodology in rate proceedings involving other utilities. There is significant uncertainty
as to the application of the methodology used in those proceedings. The Texas Commission historically
had granted rates that included an income tax component based on a "stand alone basis" and on the
utility's allowed return on equity. The Texas Commission has now altered this policy. The appeals
related to Dockets 8363 and 9945 include claims that the Texas Commission failed to adhere to the
"actual taxes incurred" methodology in setting the federal income tax expense component of the
Company's rates. As a result, any remand of Dockets 7460, 8363, 9165 or 9945 to the Texas
Commission could include a reconsideration of the respective federal income tax components, which
were based on the "stand alone" methodology previously used by the Texas Commission.
Depending on the outcome of any such remand, the Company may be required to refund certain
amounts collected in rates since 1988. The likelihood and amount of any refunds are uncertain at this
time because the ultimate outcome of the pending appeals is unknown, and the Company cannot
predict the result of any remand.
81EL PASO ELECTRIC COMPANY
(DEBTOR IN POSSESSION AS OF JANUARY 8, 1992)
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued)
Texas Rates Proposed in the Plan of Reorganization. The Company filed on January 10, 1994, for
its fifth increase under the terms of the Rate Moderation Plan ordered by the Texas Commission in
Docket 7460, and a base rate increase under the inventory plan for Palo Verde Unit 3 established in
Docket 9945. The proposed rate changes represent what the Company believes is supported under
Texas law and prior Texas Commission orders, adjusted to reflect its proposed acquisition by CSW.
The filing is proceeding under Docket 12700.
The total amount of the Company's requested cash base rate increase, exclusive of fuel, in the
filing is approximately $41.4 million. The total increase consists of (i) a base rate increase of
$8.3 million, constituting the proposed 3.5 percent increase contemplated under the Rate Moderation
Plan for costs other than those associated with Palo Verde Unit 3; and (ii) a base rate increase of $33.1
million, constituting the proposed increase under the inventory plan for Palo Verde Unit 3. As
discussed below, CSW has made a contemporaneous settlement offer that proposes rates lower than
those reflected in the Company's rate filing.
In the Docket 12700 proceeding, the Company has further proposed to reconcile its Texas fuel
costs and revenues for the period from April 1989 through June 1993 and to decrease its current
average fixed fuel factor. The proposed decrease in the average fixed fuel factor is anticipated to a
decrease annual fuel revenues by approximately $14.3 million. As a result of the fuel reconciliation
and treatment of other fuel-related items, the Company has accrued in its financial statements and
proposes to refund to Texas jurisdictional customers (as a credit to fuel revenue collections)
approximately $16.4 million over a 12-month period. In addition, the Company proposes to recover
from Texas jurisdictional customers over a 12-month period a rate case expense surcharge of
approximately $8.7 million. The net effect of the proposed changes, together with the requested rate
increases, would be an approximate $19.4 million increase in revenues from Texas jurisdictional
customers for the first 12-month period the changes are in effect.
The Company has not included in the rate filing a request to recover the costs of bankruptcy
reorganization or the $288.4 million from draws on the letters of credit related to the Company's
sale and leasebacks of portions of its interest in Palo Verde, which draws occurred in late December
1991 and early January 1992. The Company has sought to reserve the ability to seek recovery of such
costs if the Plan does not become effective.
In addition to the Company's rate filing, the Company and CSW filed on January 10, 1994, a
Joint Report and Application (the "Texas Merger Application") with the Texas Commission requesting
(i) a determination that the acquisition by CSW of one hundred percent of the Company's common
stock is consistent with the public interest; and (ii) certain determinations regarding the regulatory
treatment of the Company's proposed reacquisition of the portions of Palo Verde that it previously sold
and leased back.
As part of the Texas Merger Application and as a basis of settlement, CSW proposes rates for
Texas jurisdictional customers of the Company that are substantially less than those reflected in the
Company's rate case filing. The CSW settlement offer is contingent on the determination by the Texas
Commission that CSW's acquisition of the Company is consistent with the public interest and the
other regulatory determinations and approvals requested in the Texas Merger Application. The
proposed settlement offers (i) to limit the non-fuel base rate increase for Texas jurisdictional customers
to $25 million; (ii) a proposed $12.8 million reduction in fixed fuel factors; (iii) a refund of $16.4 million
over a 12-month period of over-recovered fuel costs and other fuel-related items; and (iv) a rate case
expense surcharge of $4.1 million related to previous rate cases to be collected over a 12-month period.
Taking into account the annual reduction in fuel costs and the proposed fuel refund, the Company's
revenues from Texas jurisdictional customers would not increase during the first year after the rate
82EL PASO ELECTRIC COMPANY
(DEBTOR IN POSSESSION AS OF JANUARY 8, 1992)
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - (Continued)
change goes into effect. The settlement rate plan proposed by CSW also provides for (i) a freeze in the
effectiveness of any additional base rate increase until 1997; (ii) a limitation in the frequency of base
rate increases following the rate freeze period through 2001 to not more than once every other year
(i.e., 1997, 1999 and 2001); and (iii) a limitation on the amount of the 1997, 1999 and 2001 base rate
increases, such that each increase would not exceed eight percent of total revenues.
The Company expects the City of El Paso and some intervenors in Docket 12700 will contest both
the Merger and the proposed rate increase. However, at this time, the City of El Paso has taken no
official action in opposition to or support of the Merger or requested rate increase. The Company
anticipates the number of intervenors will be greater than in a typical rate filing. SPS and other
Texas utilities have filed motions to intervene. The Company cannot predict at this time whether the
settlement proposal will be adopted by the Texas Commission as proposed or whether the Texas
Commission will enter the requested findings in connection with the Texas Merger Application. The
Texas Merger Application has been consolidated with Docket 12700. The presiding officers approved a
stipulation under which hearings in the consolidated proceeding will begin in late July 1994. The
Company will be entitled to increase its rates under bond in mid-July 1994, subject to refund
depending on the final outcome of the proceeding. The Company has not determined what level of
increase would be implemented under bond, should it choose to do so. The Company anticipates a final
order will be issued in Docket 12700 during the first half of 1995.
New Mexico Rate Matters
Rate Moderation Plan-Palo Verde. In 1987, the New Mexico Commission approved a stipulation
in Case 2009 establishing a rate moderation plan, pursuant to which the New Mexico jurisdictional
portion of the Company's interest in Unit 1 and one-third of common plant, and approximately 83% of
the lease payments on Unit 2 and the related common plant were phased-in to rates in three steps.
After the third step of the phase-in, the plan froze New Mexico rates through December 31, 1994. The
Company agreed that it will not request rate base or cost of service treatment, or other rate
recognition, for Unit 3 and its related Common Plant.
The Company will be required to recover the New Mexico jurisdictional portion of the Company's
investment in Unit 3 through off-system sales in the economy energy market. For several years,
market prices for economy energy sales have not been at levels sufficient to recover the New Mexico
portion of the Company's current operating expenses related to Unit 3, including decommissioning
costs and lease payments. The Company expects these market prices to remain at such levels in the
near term. The Company projects, however, that the market prices of economy energy ultimately will
rise to a level sufficient to recover the New Mexico jurisdictional portion of the Company's investment
in Unit 3 over the remaining life of the asset.
Performance Standards for Palo Verde. 1986, the New Mexico Commission established
performance standards in Case 1833 for the operation of the Palo Verde units. The entire station is
evaluated annually to determine if its achieved capacity factor entitles the Company to a reward or a
penalty. There are five performance bands based around a target capacity factor of 67.5%. Neither a
penalty nor a reward would result from capacity factors from 60% to 75%. The capacity factor is
calculated as the ratio of actual generation to maximum possible generation. Since Unit 3 is not in
rate base for purposes of New Mexico rates, any penalty or reward calculated on a total station basis is
limited to two-thirds of such penalty or reward. If the annual capacity factor is 35% or less, the
New Mexico Commission is required to initiate a proceeding to reconsider the rate base treatment.
Annual Filing Requirements. Pursuant to the New Mexico Commission's order in Case 1833, the
Company must make annual filings, at least through the term of the rate moderation plan, to reconcile
fuel costs and establish the fixed fuel factor for New Mexico customers. An annual performance
83EL PASO ELECTRIC COMPANY
(DEBTOR IN POSSESSION AS OF JANUARY 8, 1992)
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - (Continued)
standards report is included in the fuel reconciliation and any resulting rewards or penalties are
included in the establishment of a new fixed fuel factor, if a new factor is warranted. The Company
has received an extension through March 31, 1994 to file its annual fuel reconciliation report for the
period January 1, 1993 through December 31, 1993. The Company expects such report will result in a
significantly higher fuel factor, including no reward or penalty under the performance standards. The
new factor is proposed to be implemented in May 1994. The Company also has requested an extension
to file a cost of service compliance report with the New Mexico Commission in June 1994,
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission Rate Matters
The majority of the Company's rates for wholesale power and transmission services are subject to
regulation by the FERC. Sales of wholesale power subject to FERC regulation make up a significant
portion, approximately 15% in 1993, of the Company's operating revenues. Although rates to
wholesale customers require FERC approval, the Company and its wholesale customers generally
have established such rates through negotiations, based on certain cost of service assumptions, subject
to FERC acceptance of the negotiated rates.
The Company has a long-term firm power sales agreement with Imperial Irrigation District
("IID") providing for the sale of 100 MW of firm capacity to IID through April 2002. The Company also
provides contingent capacity of 50 MW to IID. The agreement generally provides for level sales prices
over the life of the agreement, which were intended to recover fully the Company's projected costs, as
well as a return. Because of the levelized rate, such costs and return were anticipated to exceed
revenues for a number of the early years of the agreement with a reciprocal effect in the later years of
the agreement. The Company has accrued revenues under the terms of the agreement in the amounts
of $2.4 million, $2.9 million, and $4.9 million in 1993, 1992 and 1991, respectively. Such accrued
amounts, which since the inception of the agreement aggregate $32 million as of December 31, 1993,
are recorded as a long-term contract receivable on the Company's balance sheets. Based on the
contractual payments, recovery of the unbilled amounts should begin in 1995. The agreement also
provides that the Company may seek increases in the sales price if sufficient evidence exists to
determine that certain operating costs have increased above those used in determining the original
sales price.
The Company has a firm power sales agreement with Texas-New Mexico Power Company
("TNP"), providing for sales to TNP in the amount of 79 MW in 1993 and 75 MW thereafter through
2002, subject to provisions in the agreement that allow a reduction to a minimum of 25 MW in the
amount of demand on a yearly basis. TNP has provided the Company notice that it would take
advantage of the provisions to reduce the contract demand to 25 MW for 1994 and 1995, while
preserving its option to maintain or reduce its contract demand in subsequent years. Sales prices,
which decline over the life of the agreement, are based on substantially the same scheduled and
projected costs and return as the IID agreement discussed above.
Rate tariffs currently applicable to IID and TNP contain appropriate fuel and purchased power
cost adjustment provisions designed to recover the Company's fuel and purchased power costs.
Other Wholesale Customers
The Company has a sales agreement to provide capacity and associated energy to CFE through
the end of 1996. The sales will be at 150 MW during the summer months and 120 MW at other times of
the year through the remaining term of the agreement. Pricing for the agreement includes an
escalating capacity charge and recovery of energy costs at system-average costs plus third-party
energy charges. To support the requirements of the agreement with CFE, the Company entered into a
firm power purchase agreement with SPS for at least 50 MW during the term of the CFE contract.
84EL PASO ELECTRIC COMPANY
(DEBTOR IN POSSESSION AS OF JANUARY 8, 1992)
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - (Continued)
D. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
General. The Company maintains its accounts in accordance with the Uniform System of
Accounts prescribed for electric utilities by the FERC. The Company, prior to December 31, 1991,
reported its regulated utility operations pursuant to SFAS No. 71, "Accounting for the Effects of
Certain Types of Regulation," as amended. As more fully discussed in Note C, the Company
discontinued the application of SFAS No. 71 as of December 31, 1991 and accounted for such
discontinuation in accordance with SFAS No. 101, "Regulated Enterprises Accounting for the
Discontinuation of Application of SFAS No. 71.".
———
The Company has accounted for all transactions related to the reorganization proceedings in
accordance with Statement of Position 90-7, "Financial Reporting by Entities in Reorganization
Under the Bankruptcy Code" ("SOP 90-7"), issued by the American Institute of Certified Public
Accountants in November 1990. Accordingly, all prepetition liabilities of the Company that are
expected to be impaired under the plan of reorganization are reported separately in the Company's
balance sheet as obligations subject to compromise (See Note H for a description of such obligations).
Expenses and interest income resulting directly from the reorganization proceedings are reported
separately in the Statements of Operations as reorganization items.
The confirmation of the Plan (Note A) did not result in changes in the carrying amounts of the
Company's assets or liabilities or the accounting bases used by the Company. Changes caused by
emerging from bankruptcy would be reflected at the Effective Date. In addition, the effects of the
Merger have not been reflected because of uncertainties regarding whether the Merger will be
consummated. In the event the Merger is consummated, it is anticipated that it would be recorded
using the purchase method of accounting whereby the Company's assets and liabilities would be
adjusted to market value on the Effective Date.
Utility Plant. Utility plant is stated at original cost, less regulatory disallowances. Costs
include labor, material, construction overheads, an allowance for funds used during construction
("AFUDC") and capitalized interest effective January 1, 1992 (see AFUDC discussion below).
Depreciation is provided on a straight-line basis at annual rates which will amortize the
undepreciated cost of depreciable property over the estimated remaining service lives which range
from 12 years to 49 years. Palo Verde Station is being amortized on a straight-line basis over
approximately 40 years.
The Company charges the cost of repairs and minor replacements to the appropriate operating
expense accounts and capitalizes the cost of renewals and betterments. Gains or losses resulting from
retirements or other dispositions of operating property in the normal course of business are credited or
charged to the accumulated provision for depreciation.
Decommissioning cost for the Company's interest in Palo Verde is charged to depreciation
expense. The Company amortizes decommissioning costs over the estimated service life for the portion
of its owned interest and over the term of the related leases for the portions sold and leased back.
The cost of nuclear fuel is amortized to fuel expense on a unit-of-production basis. A provision
for spent fuel disposal costs is charged to expense based on requirements of DOE for disposal cost of
one-tenth of one cent on each kilowatt hour generated.
AFUDC. As a result of discontinuation of the application of SFAS No. 71, the Company
discontinued accruing AFUDC in 1992. In place of AFUDC, the Company capitalizes to construction
work in progress ("CWIP") interest cost calculated in accordance with SFAS No. 34, "Capitalization of
85EL PASO ELECTRIC COMPANY
(DEBTOR IN POSSESSION AS OF JANUARY 8, 1992)
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued)
Interest Cost," and SOP 90-7. The amount of AFUDC was determined by applying an accrual rate to
the balance of certain CWIP costs. In this connection, the FERC has promulgated procedures for the
computation (a prescribed formula) of the accrual rate. The weighted average accrual rate for AFUDC
was 8.35% for 1991.
Cash and Cash Equivalents. All temporary cash investments with an original maturity of three
months or less are considered cash equivalents.
Investments. The Company values its investments at amortized cost. Such investments consist
primarily of municipal bonds in trust funds established for decommissioning Palo Verde. SFAS
No. 115, "Accounting for Certain Investments in Debt and Equity Securities," will require these
investments to be valued at market value beginning in 1994. The Company does not believe the
effects of adopting SFAS No. 115 will be significant.
Inventories. Inventories, primarily parts, materials and supplies, are stated at average cost.
Operating Revenues. Operating revenues are accrued for sales of electricity subsequent to
monthly billing cycle dates but prior to the end of the accounting month.
Fuel Cost Adjustment Provisions. Fuel revenues and expense are stated at actual cost incurred.
The Company's Texas and New Mexico retail customers are presently being billed under fixed fuel
factors approved by the Texas Commission and the New Mexico Commission. Rate tariffs currently
applicable to certain FERC jurisdictional customers contain appropriate fuel and purchased power
cost adjustment provisions designed to recover the Company's fuel and purchased power costs. Any
difference in fuel cost versus cash recovery from the Company's ratepayers is reflected as
over/under-recovered fuel in the balance sheet.
Federal Income Taxes and Investment Tax Credits. Effective January 1, 1993, the Company
began accounting for federal income taxes under SFAS No. 109, "Accounting for Income Taxes," which
requires the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under the asset and liability
method, deferred income taxes are recognized for the estimated future tax consequences of "temporary
differences" by applying enacted statutory tax rates for each taxable jurisdiction applicable to future
years to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts and the tax bases of existing
assets and liabilities. SFAS No. 109 recognizes the effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a
change in tax rate in income in the period that includes the enactment date. Prior to 1993, in
accordance with Accounting Principles Board Opinion No. 11 ("APB Opinion No. 11"), the Company
used the deferred method of accounting for income taxes. Under the deferred method, deferred income
taxes are provided on timing differences between reporting income and expense items for financial
statement and income tax purposes. The Company recognized the effect of a change in accounting
principle for the adoption of SFAS No. 109 by a $96 million charge to results of operations.
Investment tax credit generated by the Company is deferred and amortized to income over the
estimated remaining useful lives of the property that generated the credit.
Benefit Plans. See Note L for accounting policies regarding the Company's retirement plans
and postretirement benefits.
Reclassifications. Certain amounts in the financial statements for 1992 have been reclassified
to conform with the 1993 presentation.
86
4EL PASO ELECTRIC COMPANY
(DEBTOR IN POSSESSION AS OF JANUARY 8, 1992)
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - (Continued)
E. Palo Verde Nuclear Generating Station
The Company has a 15.8% undivided interest in the Palo Verde Station in which six other
utilities (collectively, the "Palo Verde Participants") have interests, including Arizona Public Service
Company ("APS"), who is the operating agent of Palo Verde. The operation of Palo Verde and the
relationship among the Palo Verde Participants is governed by the ANPP Participation Agreement. A
summary of the Company's 15.8% investment in the three 1,270 MW nuclear generating units, which
comprise Palo Verde Station and investment in other jointly owned utility plant, excluding fuel, is as
follows:
December 31, 1993:
Palo Verde Station
Other
December 31, 1992:
Palo Verde Station
Other
Electric Plant
in Service
$ 928,351
133,561
$ 916,604
133,301
Accumulated
Depreciation
(In thousands)
$ (112,296)
(49,628)
(93,456)
(44,623)
Construction Work
in Progress
87
$ 19,881
1,833
$ 22,397
995
The Company's investment, at cost, in the Palo Verde Station in the amount of approximately
$948.2 million at December 31, 1993 excluded amounts of approximately $653.4 million which
represent the book value of the Company's investment in Palo Verde Station which was sold and
leased back during 1986 and 1987 and for which the related leases are accounted for as operating
leases. See Note B of Notes to Financial Statements for information regarding such transactions and
the Company's lease obligations relating thereto. The Company's share of direct expenses of operating
jointly owned plant is included in the corresponding operating expense captions on the statement of
operations.
Steam Generator Tubes. Following the rupture of a steam generator tube in Unit 2 on
March 14, 1993, APS began an inspection program of the steam generators in each unit. Such
program included inspections of tubes in both steam generators in each unit, beginning with Unit 2
during its scheduled refueling outage that began in March 1993, and continuing with the regularly
scheduled refueling outage for Unit 1 in September 1993 and mid-cycle inspection outages for Unit 3
in November 1993 and Unit 2 in January 1994.
APS identified and implemented corrective actions to address the accelerated tube degradation
found in Unit 2 and the more common type of tube cracking found in each unit during the inspections.
Such corrective actions include chemical cleaning, operating at reduced temperature levels and, for a
period of time, operating each unit at 85-86% power.
Liability and Insurance Matters. The Palo Verde Participants have insurance for public liability
payments resulting from nuclear energy hazards to the full limit of liability under federal law. This
potential liability is covered by primary liability insurance provided by commercial insurance carriers
in the amount of $200 million and the balance by an industry-wide retrospective assessment program.
The maximum assessment per reactor under the retrospective rating program for each nuclear
incident is approximately $79.2 million, subject to an annual limit of $10 million per incident. Based
upon the Company's 15.8% interest in the three Palo Verde units, the Company's maximum potential
assessment per incident is approximately $37.6 million, with an annual payment limitation of
approximately $4.7 million.EL PASO ELECTRIC COMPANY
(DEBTOR IN POSSESSION AS OF JANUARY 8, 1992)
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued)
The Palo Verde Participants maintain "all risk" (including nuclear hazards) insurance for
property damage to, and decontamination of, property at Palo Verde in the aggregate amount of
$2.7 billion, a substantial portion of which must first be applied to stabilization and decontamination.
The Company has also secured insurance against portions of any increased cost of generation or
purchased power resulting from the accidental outage of any of the three units if the outage exceeds
21 weeks.
Decommissioning. The Company's depreciation expense includes approximately $7.5 million,
$5.2 million and $3.6 million in 1993, 1992 and 1991, respectively, for the estimated future
decommissioning costs for the owned and leased portions of Palo Verde based on decommissioning
studies performed for the Company. The above amounts reflect updated studies implemented in July
1992 and September 1993. The Company is accruing its decommissioning obligation over the
estimated service life (approximately 40 years) for the portion of its owned interest in Palo Verde and
over the term of the related leases (27 to 29) years for the portions of Palo Verde that were sold and
leased back. As of December 31, 1993, the Company has accrued approximately $30.1 million of
decommissioning costs, including interest, which is reflected in the Company's balance sheet in
deferred credits and other liabilities.
The Company is utilizing a site specific study for Palo Verde, dated December 1993, prepared
for the Company by an independent consultant, that estimates the cost to decommission the
Company's share of Palo Verde to be approximately $221 million (stated in 1993 dollars). Such
amount includes an estimated cost to decommission on-site spent fuel storage facilities of
approximately $50 million. The study assumes the prompt removal/dismantlement method of
decommissioning will be used to decommission Palo Verde. The study also assumes (i) that
decommissioning will take place from 2024 through 2035 for the production units, (ii) that
maintenance expense for spent fuel storage will be incurred from 2035 through 2067 and (iii) that
decommissioning of the spent fuel storage facilities will occur in 2067. Although the study is based on
the latest available information, there can be no assurance that decommissioning costs will not
continue to increase in the future.
The Company has established trusts with independent trustees, which enable the Company to
record a current deduction for federal income tax purposes of a portion of amounts funded. As of
December 31, 1993, the aggregate balance of the trust funds was approximately $15.8 million, which
is reflected in the Company's balance sheet in deferred charges and other assets. Earnings on the
trusts' funds of approximately $600,000, $500,000 and $400,000 in 1993, 1992 and 1991, respectively,
are reflected on the statements of operations as interest income. The Company is currently collecting
a portion of decommissioning costs for Palo Verde Units 1 and 2 in all three of its ratemaking
jurisdictions and for Unit 3 in its Texas and FERC jurisdictions. The Company must fund the
decommissioning requirements for the New Mexico jurisdictional portion of Unit 3 through off-system
sales of economy energy as Unit 3 is excluded from New Mexico jurisdictional rate base. Because the
Company is under fixed-price long term contracts with its FERC customers, the amount of
decommissioning costs received in current rates is insufficient to fund the FERC portion of
decommissioning costs, and therefore, the Company must fund this shortfall through internally
generated cash.
Currently, the Company is funding decommissioning costs over the estimated service life for its
owned portion of Palo Verde and, prior to filing the bankruptcy petition, over the term of the related
leases for the leased portion of Palo Verde. Subsequent to the filing of the bankruptcy petition, the
Company has made contributions to the decommissioning trusts pursuant to funding requirements of
the NRC, the ANPP Participation Agreement and orders of the Texas Commission, the New Mexico
Commission and the FERC. These funded amounts are slightly less than what would have been
required pursuant to provisions under applicable agreements related to the Company's sale/leaseback
88EL PASO ELECTRIC COMPANY
(DEBTOR IN POSSESSION AS OF JANUARY 8, 1992)
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued)
.
transactions for Units 2 and 3. Under the proposed terms of the Plan, the Company would reacquire
all portions of Palo Verde sold and leased back. If this occurs, the Company anticipates it would accrue
for and fund all portions of the Palo Verde decommissioning costs over the operating license terms.
This funding method has been incorporated in the rate request in the Company's rate filing currently
pending before the Texas Commission.
The Energy Policy Act includes an assessment for decontamination of the DOE's enrichment
facilities. The total amount of this assessment has not yet been finalized; however, based on
preliminary indications, APS estimates that the annual assessment for Palo Verde will be
approximately $3 million, plus increases for inflation, for the next fifteen years. The Company
recorded a charge to results of operations in 1992 in the amount of approximately $7.1 million which
represents its portion of the estimated assessment.
The SEC staff recently announced its intention to require that estimated total decommissioning
costs be recorded as a liability in the financial statements beginning in 1994. The FASB indicated
that it may consider the broader area of the treatment of environmental exit costs, which would
encompass decommissioning of nuclear power plants. The SEC staff has preliminarily indicated that
if the FASB considers this issue, it will delay any change in the current practice of accruing the
decommissioning liability over the plant's useful life, pending FASB action. If the SEC staff were to
require such a change in 1994, the Company would be required to record an additional liability of
approximately $191 million based on the current cost estimates discussed above. At the present time,
the Company cannot predict the effects on the financial condition or results of operations if it were
required to record the additional liability.
ANPP Participation Agreement. Pursuant to the ANPP Participation Agreement, each
Palo Verde Participant is required to fund its proportionate share of operation and maintenance,
capital and fuel costs of Palo Verde. The Company's total monthly share of these costs is
approximately $7 million. The ANPP Participation Agreement provides that if a Palo Verde
Participant fails to meet its payment obligations, each non-defaulting Palo Verde Participant shall
pay its proportionate share of the payments owed by the defaulting Palo Verde Participant. On
February 13, 1992, the Bankruptcy Court approved a stipulation between the Company and APS, as
the operating agent of Palo Verde, pursuant to which the Company agreed to pay its proportionate
share of all Palo Verde invoices delivered to the Company after February 6, 1992. The Company
agreed to make these payments until such time as an order is entered by the Bankruptcy Court, if
ever, authorizing or directing the Company's rejection of the ANPP Participation Agreement
governing the relationship among the Palo Verde Participants. The stipulation also specifies that
approximately $9.2 million of the Company's Palo Verde payment obligations are to be considered
prepetition general unsecured claims of the other Palo Verde Participants. Pursuant to the Plan, the
Company intends to assume the ANPP Participation Agreement and the other agreements related to
the operation of Palo Verde. To accomplish this and to resolve pending issues related to the
assumption of the agreements and cure of existing defaults, the Company and the other Palo Verde
Participants have entered into a Cure and Assumption Agreement that was approved by the
Bankruptcy Court on November 19, 1993. The Cure and Assumption Agreement sets forth the
mechanism by which the ANPP Participation Agreement and other operating agreements related to
Palo Verde will be assumed as of the Effective Date. Pursuant to the agreement, the Company paid
APS, as operating agent, the amount of the prepetition obligations and APS paid the Company
amounts of prepetition refunds that had been withheld, subject to all of such amounts being returned
in the event the Plan does not become effective.
89EL PASO ELECTRIC COMPANY
(DEBTOR IN POSSESSION AS OF JANUARY 8, 1992)
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS. (Continued)
F.
Common Stock
In May 1989, the Board of Directors eliminated the second quarter 1989 common stock dividend
and the Company has not paid dividends on its common stock since then.
Resumption of dividends on common stock will depend on the terms of the Plan that becomes
effective in the Company's Bankruptcy Case as well as applicable provisions of state law and the
Federal Power Act. Under certain provisions of the Federal Power Act regarding the payment of
dividends on capital stock, as interpreted by the staff of the FERC, the Company is permitted to pay
dividends on its capital stock only out of retained earnings.
Employee Stock Purchase Plan. The Company has an employee stock purchase plan under
which eligible employees are granted options twice each year to purchase, through payroll deductions,
shares of common stock from the Company at a specified discount from the fair market value of the
stock; provided, however, that if the option price exceeds the fair market value of the stock on the date
of exercise of the option, the Company, in lieu of selling the stock at the option price, purchases in
the open market, for the accounts of the participants, that number of shares of common stock as the
aggregate of the payroll deductions under the plan will purchase. Discount from fair market value is
charged to expense. This employee benefit plan will terminate June 30, 1994.
Employee Stock Compensation Plan. The Company has a broad-based employee stock
compensation plan under which shares of Company common stock may be issued from time to time to
eligible employees. Under the plan, the Board's Compensation/Benefits Committee may direct the
issuance from time to time of Company common stock to compensate employees for past services
rendered to the Company or to pay for various employee benefits with common stock rather than with
cash. In 1991, the Board of Directors approved the reservation of an additional 600,000 shares of stock
for issuance under the plan. However, the Company has not filed the necessary applications with the
New Mexico Commission and the FERC to obtain approval of the issuance of the additional
600,000 shares or the registration statement related to such shares with the SEC and does not intend
to do so at the current time. Market value of shares issued would be charged to expense. Under the
Plan and Merger, this employee benefit plan would be terminated at the Effective Date of the Plan.
Employee Stock Option Plan. The Company's Employee Stock Option Plan was approved by the
Board of Directors in December 1987 and received shareholder and regulatory approval in 1988.
Following amendment in 1990 to approve an increase in the number of shares available, the plan
authorizes the issuance of up to 3,000,000 shares of common stock pursuant to options which may be
granted at not less than fair market value.
At December 31, 1993, the outstanding common stock options are as follows:
Option
Price
Date of Options
August 23, 1989
January 24, 1990
March 27, 1990
May 21, 1990
November 19, 1990
May 18, 1992
November 17, 1992
Total options outstanding
Total options exercisable at December 31, 1993
90
$ 8.875
8.625
8.375
7.250
3.875
3.000
2.500
Number
of Shares
325,600
100,000
145,800
50,000
895,525
750,000
722,100
2.989.025
1,516.925