ARS
P.E.
12-31-96
PG&E
1996 Annual Report
PG&E Corporation
A New Beginning
SEC MAIL
WASH.. D.C.
RECEIVED
97 03 1651
PROCESSING
359
1-12609
MAR 0 4 1997
SECTION
Lax
PROCESSED BY
50-50:P
MAR 12 1997
DISCLOSURE, INC.was formed on January 1, 1997. Its subsidiaries include Pacific Gas and Electric Company (PG&E),
Pacific Gas Transmission (PGT) and PG&E Enterprises. Through these subsidiaries and their affiliates, PG&E Corporation
markets energy services in North America and Australia. In Northern and Central Californía, PG&E provides natural gas and
electric service to more than 13 million people. PGT and its affiliates own and operate natural gas transmission lines from the
California border to Canada and in the Pacific Northwest, Texas and Queensland, Australia. U.S. Generating Company (USGen),
an unregulated joint venture with Bechtel Enterprises, Inc., is a leading competitive power supplier in U.S. markets. USGen and its
affiliates have ownership interests and management responsibilities in 17 power plants located in eight states with a combined
generation capacity of nearly 3,400 megawatts. While PG&E Corporation's markets.now are primarily in the U.S., the corporation
continues to identify and evaluate energy opportunities in other nations around the world.
:
(dollars in thousands, except per share amounts)
For the Year
Operating revenues
Operating income
Net income
Earnings available for common stock
Earnings per common share
Dividends declared per common share
Capital expenditures (including AFUDC)
Total electric sales to customers (kWh - in thousands)
Total Igas sales to customers (Mcf — in thousands)
At Year End
Total assets
Total electric customers
Total
gas customers
Number of common shareholders
Number of common shares outstanding
Number of employees
1996
9,609,972
$
$
1,895,585
755,209
$ 722,096
$
1.75
1.77
1,403,769
74,394,282
264,439
$ 26,129,925
4,463.000
3,677,000
198,000
403,504,292
22,000
1995
9,621,765
$ 2,762,985
1,338,885
1,268,597
2.99
1.96
964,657
75,358,632
269,904
$ 26,850,290
4,408,000
3,628,000
220,000
414,025,586
22,000
% Change
(0.1)
(31.4)
(43.6)
(43.1)
(41.5)
(9.7)
45.5
(1.3)
(2.0)
(2.7)
1.2
1.4
(10.0)
(2.5)The strength of a living thing
can be recognized in its endurance...
Letter to Shareholders
Financial Information
Directors
Officers
Shareholder Information
2
8
45
46
47Letter to Shareholders
Welcome to the first annual report of PG&E Corporation, the
holding company which our shareholders approved at the
annual meeting last April. PG&E Corporation was officially
created on January 1, 1997.
Under the new structure, Pacific Gas and Electric Company
(PG&E), Pacific Gas Transmission (PGT) and PG&E Enterprises are
now subsidiaries of PG&E Corporation.
But the holding company is more than just a new name and
redefined corporate structure. It is a new beginning.
We are confident that it will significantly increase our
flexibility, will add to our ability to respond to competitive
changes in the utility industry and to new opportunities in energy
services businesses, and will help us to meet our goal as we
approach the millennium: to be a recognized leader in the energy
industry, here in the U.S. and around the globe.
The name of the holding company is, of course, familiar.
It reflects the experience, strength and success of Pacific Gas
and Electric Company, which has provided energy to
millions of customers in Northern and Central California for
almost a century.
But while its heritage is rooted in the past, PG&E Corporation
is focused squarely on the ample opportunities for profitable
growth it sees in the future.
A new day has dawned in the energy industry, bringing with
it new complexities and new opportunities in domestic and
foreign markets.
In the competitive and dynamic business environment now
emerging, successful companies will be those with the skills,
resources and agility to keep up with change, recognize new
possibilities, market the range of energy services customers want
and do it all profitably.
That is the kind of organization we are building with
PG&E Corporation.
We know what PG&E Corporation must do, to achieve
its objectives. We also know that in the short run it won't always be
an easy task.
Over the next five years, a significant portion of our
business will be transformed from a monopoly to a competitive
enterprise. The various component parts of the business that
traditionally have been bundled together in vertically integrated
utilities now will be unbundled to give customers choice in the
services they receive.
Some components, such as distribution, will remain
regulated. Others, such as electric generation, will be largely
deregulated and fully competitive.
2
To help customers manage their needs in this new marketplace,
an energy services industry is now developing and will continue
to expand and prosper. PG&E Corporation intends to be an
active participant in all elements of this new gas and electric
services business.
During the transition to a restructured energy marketplace,
as we continue to take the steps needed to make components of
our business more competitive, earnings will be lower than in the
recent past.
In particular, we will accelerate the depreciation of our
Diablo Canyon nuclear power plant between now and the end of 2001
in order to price the electricity it generates at competitive levels.
This means revenues will be offset by greater depreciation,
lowering the earnings available for dividends.
Recognizing this fact, the company in October reduced the
common stock dividend approximately 39 percent to an annualized
level of $1,20 per share. This level is one that we believe can be
sustained and, over time, increased with the strong performance
we expect from our various businesses. As anticipated, earnings
per share for 1996 were $1.75, down from the $2.99 per share we
reported in 1995.
These results are the product of steps-hard but
necessary steps we are taking to achieve the competitive,
successful future we are confident lies ahead for your company.
As we work to achieve that future, we remain fully aware of
our responsibility to increase the value of your investment in
PG&E Corporation.
We believe there is good reason for optimism that earnings,
the dividend and stock price will rise over time and that PG&E
Corporation will grow, because we are building that success on
firm footings and a focused strategic vision. The foundation upon
which our new corporation stands is a utility business which we
are continuing to strengthen.
We undertook major programs in 1996 to upgrade the
systems and facilities of our core electric distribution business.
These programs will improve customer service, increase
reliability and safety, and hone PG&E's competitiveness in the
more deregulated energy market to come.
In 1996, California enacted Assembly Bill 1890. This law
provides a clear legislative road map for achieving electric
restructuring in California. It also reduces the financial uncertainties
surrounding the restructuring by providing legislative assurance
that the state's utilities will have a fair opportunity to recover
significant costs associated with the transition to a competitive
electric marketplace.and the ability to create new beginnings...
3
PO&E CORPORATIONOur gas and electric utility business continued to provide
strong cash flow in 1996, which enabled us to repurchase
a net of $236 million worth of PG&E common stock and retire
a net of $384 million of long-term debt during the year.
Over the next several years of transition to a restructured
electric industry, we believe cash flow will remain strong as
PG&E recovers its investments in utility generation. This will
give the corporation substantial flexibility to invest in new
business opportunities and continue to retire debt and buy back
common stock.
And in our gas business, we continued over the year to
expand into domestic and foreign markets through acquisitions
of companies that operate in Texas, the Midwest and Eastern U.S.,
Australia and Canada.
In the energy world that is evolving, customers will be able
to choose from an array of products and services provided by
numerous competitive suppliers. Many customers will exercise
their ability to choose. But as they do, many will not want the
hassle of obtaining individual services from a wide variety of
individual providers.
Like consumers who favor the convenience afforded by one-
stop shopping at a supermarket, many customers will seek "energy
supermarkets" organizations that can integrate options into
custom-tailored packages and "one-stop" total energy solutions.
PG&E Corporation's strategy is based on satisfying customers'
desires for both choice and convenience. We intend to leverage
the skill, experience and knowledge we have attained over a
century of success in the electric and gas business to take full
advantage of profitable opportunities as competitive markets
open up.
Our plan is to pursue four lines of business.
Energy Services: This will be the major conduit between the
customer and the energy choices PG&E Corporation and others in
the market will offer. This unregulated business will help provide
products and services from both the corporation's various gas and
electric units and from competitive suppliers, packaging them in
whatever combinations best meet individual customers' needs.
The energy services business will create value for customers by
acting as their agent, helping them to make intelligent choices in a
crowded and confusing marketplace of competing options.
it will be able to put together a wide range of energy
services, obtaining gas and electricity from competitive producers,
arranging for distribution and transmission service, providing
customized energy billing and analysis, and offering energy retrofits,
energy efficiency products and services, and facility improvements.
4
It also will market power quality services for customers whose
manufacturing processes require uninterrupted power supplies.
Through energy services, we will market our decades of experience
in managing electric and gas facilities by contracting with
utilities to help operate their distribution systems.
Distribution: The business of delivering gas and electricity
to customers will remain a regulated function. Even if customers
choose to purchase their electricity from other generators, the
power will be delivered to their homes and businesses by the local
distribution company. However, over time, there will be pressure
to allow competitive suppliers to perform some functions that
traditionally have been part of the distribution business.
Generation: While the amount of PG&E-owned electric
generation will decline in the company's traditional service area,
we will retain the Diablo Canyon nuclear power plant in California
and will continue to develop, own and operate independent power
plants in North America and possibly other selected regions of
the world.
In 1995, the California Public Utilities Commission urged
utilities to divest 50 percent of their fossil-fueled generation. In
response to this request, PG&E in 1996 announced its intention
to sell four of its fossil-fueled plants. These four plants represent
half of PG&E's total fossil-fueled generating capacity,
U.S. Generating Company (USGen), our unregulated joint
venture with Bechtel Enterprises, Inc., is a leading competitive
power supplier, USGen and its affiliates have ownership
interests and management responsibilities in 17 electric
generation plants, which represent nearly 3,400 megawatts
of generating capacity. The management success of these plants
reflects USGen's leadership in clean generating technologies,
as well as innovative operations, maintenance and environmental
management techniques.
USGen is making substantial progress toward achieving its
goals of continued long-term growth and profitability. By 2000,
through development, acquisitions and concentrated marketing
to meet its customers' needs, USGen intends to more than
double the megawatts controlled in its current power plant
portfolio. With effective management and efficient operation,
USGen is confident it can continue to be a pace-setter in the
evolving competitive marketplace.
Gas: We are pursuing the "midstream" portion of the gas
market. This includes gas gathering, processing, storage, trans-
portation and commodity marketing. This line of business pre-
sents attractive growth opportunities.
We estimate that $110 billion worth of new gas pipeline
projects and facilities will be built worldwide between now and 2010.
:which foster new growth...
5
PG&G CORPORATIONSTANLEY T. SKINNER
Customers will include utilities, electric generators, large industrial
companies and local distribution organizations.
The corporation took a significant step forward in the midstream
gas line of business in April of last year with the acquisition of the
Queensland State Gas Pipeline in Australia. We see significant
additional opportunities in Australia for this line of business.
In late 1996 and early 1997, we purchased Energy Source,
Inc. (ESI) and Teco Pipeline Company. ESI markets natural gas
supplies in the Midwest and Eastern U.S. and Canada. Teco Pipeline
operates more than 1,000 miles of transmission and gas-gathering
pipelines in Texas with a capacity of 1.5 billion cubic feet per day.
On January 31, 1997, we agreed to acquire the natural gas
services business of Valero Energy Corporation, Valero Natural
Gas Company, which operates a 7,500-mile natural gas pipeline
system and eight natural gas processing plants in Texas. Valero's
pipeline system has a capacity of more than 3 billion cubic feet
of gas per day. Based in San Antonio, Texas, Valero's operations
include the gathering, transporting, marketing and storage of
natural gas; the processing, transporting and marketing of natural
gas liquids; and the marketing of electricity.
Together, Valero, Teco and ESI will create one of the top ten
gas marketing operations in the nation, with average daily sales
volumes of 3.6 billion cubic feet per day in 1996.
We are optimistic about our ability to succeed in these lines
of business. We have capable employees, abundant skills and a
clear direction.
6
Our holding company is a new beginning, a new opportunity
to build on our long record of outstanding performance in the
energy industry.
For all of these reasons, we strongly believe that PG&E
Corporation's prospects are promising and that we will continue
to provide excellent value to our shareholders, our customers
and the many communities we serve.
Staley & Shiner
Stanley T. Skinner
Chairman of the Board and
Chief Executive Officer
February 10, 1997
ROBERT D. GLYNN, JR.
равино рут з
Robert D. Glynn, Jr.
President and Chief
Operating Officerwhich ultimately endures.
7
PG&E CORPORATION(in thousands, except per share amounts)
For the Year
Operating revenues
Operating income
Net income
Earnings per common share
Dividends declared per common share
At Year End
Book value per common share
Common stock price per share
Total assets
Long-term debt and preferred
stock and securities with mandatory
redemption provisions (excluding
current portions)
PG&E Corporation
Selected Financial Data
1996
$ 9,609,972
1,895,585
755,209
1.75
1.77
20.73
21.00
26,129,925
1995
$9,621,765
2,762,985
1,338,885
2.99
1.96
1994
$10,350,230
2,423,786
1,007,450
$ 20.77 $
28.38
26,850,290
| a
2.21
1.96
20.07
24.38
27,708,564
1993
$10,550,002
2,560,235
1,065,495
$
2.33
1.88
19.77
35.13
27,145,899
1992
$10,315,713
2,699,824
1,170,581
2.58
1.76
19.41
33.13
24,188,159
8,207,567
8,486,046
8,812,591
9,367,100 1
8,525,948
Matters relating to certain data above are discussed in Management's Discussion and Analysis of Consolidated Results of Operations and Financial Condition and in
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.PG&E Corporation
Management's Discussion and Analysis of
Consolidated Results of Operations and Financial Condition
Effective January 1, 1997, Pacific Gas and Electric Company
(PG&E) became a subsidiary of its new parent holding company,
PG&E Corporation, PG&E's ownership interest in Pacific Gas
Transmission Company (PGT) and PG&E Enterprises
(Enterprises) was transferred to PG&E Corporation. PG&E's
outstanding common stock was converted on a share-for-
share basis into PG&E Corporation common stock. PG&E's debt
securities and preferred stock were unaffected and remain
securities of PG&E.
This holding company structure is intended to improve PG&E
Corporation's ability to respond to new business opportunities
and changes in the utility industry. It will enhance the finan-
cial separation of the California utility business from PG&E
Corporation's other businesses and will provide greater
financing flexibility.
The consolidated financial statements in this annual report
include the accounts of PG&E and its wholly-owned and con-
trolled subsidiaries (collectively, the Company) and, therefore,
also represent the accounts of PG&E Corporation and its sub-
sidiaries. PG&E provides generation, procurement, transmission,
and distribution of electricity and natural gas to customers
throughout most of Northern and Central California. PG&E is
regulated by the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC).
the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC), and the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission, among others.
PGT and Enterprises, previously wholly-owned by PG&E, are
now wholly-owned subsidiaries of PG&E Corporation. Through
these subsidiaries, the Company is expanding its presence in
the "midstream" portion of the gas business, the independent
power generation business, and the energy services business.
The midstream portion of the gas business includes gas
gathering, processing, storage, and transportation. The energy
services business includes obtaining gas and electricity from
competitive producers, arranging for distribution and transmis-
sion service, and providing customized energy billing and analy-
sis, power quality assessments, energy efficiency products and
services, and facility improvements.
PGT transports gas from the Canadian border to the
California border and the Pacific Northwest and is regulated
by the FERC. In 1996, PGT acquired PGT Queensland Gas
Pipeline in Australia and Energy Source, the North American
gas operations of Edisto Resources Corporation. In January
1997, PG&E Corporation acquired Teco Pipeline Company
9
(Teco) in Texas. Teco owns a natural gas pipeline system in
Texas, investments in gas gathering and processing facilities,
and a gas marketing company in Houston. Also in January
1997, PG&E Corporation agreed to acquire Valero Natural Gas
Company (Valero) (see Acquisitions and Sales below).
Enterprises, through its subsidiaries and affiliates, develops,
owns, and operates unregulated electric and gas projects in
the U.S. and around the world. Vantus Energy Corporation
(Vantus), a subsidiary of Enterprises, markets gas and electric-
ity commodities and provides energy services.
The following discussion of consolidated results of
operations and financial condition includes forward-looking
statements that involve risks and uncertainties, Words such
as "estimates," "expects," "anticipates," "plans," and similar
expressions identify forward-looking statements involving risks
and uncertainties.
These risks and uncertainties include but are not limited to
the ongoing restructuring of the electric and gas industries and
the outcome of regulatory proceedings related to that restruc-
turing. The ultimate impacts of both increased competition and
the changing regulatory environment on future results are
uncertain, but both are expected to fundamentally change how
the Company conducts its business. The outcome of these
changes and other matters discussed below may cause future
results to differ materially from historic results, or from results
or outcomes currently expected or sought by the Company.
Competition and Changing Regulatory
Environment: The electric and gas industries are
undergoing significant change. Under traditional regulation,
utilities were provided the opportunity to earn a fair return on
their invested capital in exchange for a commitment to serve
all customers within a designated service territory. The objec-
tive of this regulatory policy was to provide universal access to
safe and reliable utility services. Regulation was designed in
part to take the place of competition and ensure that these
services were provided at fair prices.
Today, competitive pressures and emerging market forces
are exerting an increasing influence over the structure of the
gas and electric industries. Other companies are challenging
the utilities' exclusive relationship with customers and are
seeking to replace certain utility functions with their own.
Customers, too, are asking for choice in their energy provider.PG&E Corporation
Management's Discussion and Analysis of
Consolidated Results of Operations and Financial Condition
These pressures are causing a move from the existing regula-
tory framework to a framework under which competition
would be allowed in certain segments of the gas and electric
industries.
For several years, PG&E has been working with its regulators
to achieve an orderly transition to competition and to ensure
that PG&E has an opportunity to recover investments made
under the traditional regulatory policies. In addition, PG&E has
proposed alternative forms of regulation for those services for
which prices and terms will not be determined by competition.
These alternative forms include performance-based ratemaking
(PBR) and other incentive-based alternatives. Over the next
five years, a significant portion of PG&E's business will be trans-
formed from the current utility monopoly to a competitive
operation. This change will impact PG&E's financial results and
may result in greater earnings volatility. During the transition
period, PG&E expects the return on Diablo Canyon Nuclear
Power Plant (Diablo Canyon) and certain other generation
assets to be significantly lower than historical levels.
Electric Industry Restructuring: In 1995, the
CPUC issued a decision that provides a plan to restructure
California's electric utility industry. The decision acknowledges
that much of utilities' current costs and commitments result
from past CPUC decisions and that, in a competitive generation
market, utilities would not recover some of these costs
through market-based revenues. To assure the continued finan-
cial integrity of California utilities, the CPUC authorized recov-
ery of these above-market costs, called "transition costs."
In 1996, California legislation was passed that adopts the
basic tenets of the CPUC's restructuring decision, including
recovery of transition costs. In addition, the legislation pro-
vides a 10 percent rate reduction for residential and small
commercial customers by January 1, 1998, freezes electric
customer rates for all other customers, and requires the accel-
erated recovery of transition costs associated with owned
generation facilities. The legislation also establishes the operat-
ing framework for a competitive generation market.
The rate freeze will continue until the earlier of March 31,
2002, or until PG&E has recovered its transition costs (the
transition period). The freeze will hold rates at 1996 levels
for all customers except those receiving the 10 percent
rate reduction. The rate freeze will hold the rates for these
customers at the reduced level.
To achieve the 10 percent rate reduction, the legislation
authorizes utilities to finance a portion of their transition costs
with "rate reduction bonds." The maturity period of the bonds
is expected to extend beyond the transition period. Also, the
interest cost of the bonds is expected to be lower than PG&E's
current cost of capital. Once this portion of transition costs
is financed, PG&E would collect a separate tariff to recover
principal, interest, and issuance costs over the life of the bonds
from residential and small commercial customers. The combi-
nation of the longer maturity period and the reduced interest
costs will lower the amounts paid by these customers each
year during the transition period thereby achieving the 10 per-
cent reduction in rates.
10
During 1997, differences between authorized and actual base
revenues and differences between the actual cost of electric
generation and the revenue designated for recovery of such
revenues or costs will be recorded in balancing accounts. Any
residual balance will be available for transition cost recovery.
During 1997, amounts recorded in balancing accounts will be
subject to a reasonableness review by the CPUC.
Absent the rate freeze, PG&E's rates would be expected
to decline under existing cost-based ratemaking method-
ologies. The most significant reasons for the decrease in
cost-based rates are the declining cost of
power committed
under certain purchase power contracts, the reduction in the
Diablo Canyon price for power under the existing CPUC-
approved settlement, and the decline in uncollected electric
balancing accounts.
Transition Cost Recovery: The legislation authorizes the
CPUC to determine the costs eligible for recovery as transition
costs. The amount of costs will be based on the aggregate of
above-market and below-market values of utility-owned gener-
ation assets and obligations. PG&E has proposed that costs eligi-
ble for transition cost recovery include: (1) above-market sunk
costs (costs associated with utility generating facilities that are
fixed and unavoidable and currently collected through rates)
and future costs, such as costs related to plant removal, (2)
above-market costs associated with purchase power obliga-
tions with Qualifying Facilities (QFS) and other Power Purchase
Agreements, and (3) generation-related regulatory assets and
obligations, PG&E cannot determine the exact amount of sunkcosts that will be above market and recoverable as transition
costs until a market valuation process (appraisal or sale) is
completed for each generation facility. This process will be
completed during the transition period.
In compliance with the CPUC's restructuring decision and the
restructuring legislation, PG&E has filed numerous regulatory
applications and proposals that detail its transition cost recov-
ery plan. PG&E's recovery plan includes: (1) separation or
unbundling of its previously approved cost-of-service revenue
requirement for its electric operations into distribution, trans-
mission, public purpose programs (PPPS), and generation, (2)
accelerated recovery of transition costs, and (3) development
of a ratemaking mechanism to track and match revenues and
cost recovery during the transition period.
The unbundling of PG&E's revenue requirement enables it to
separate revenue provided by frozen rates into transmission,
distribution, PPPs, and generation. As proposed, revenues col-
lected under frozen rates would be assigned to transmission,
distribution, and PPPS based upon their respective cost of
service. Revenue would also be provided for other costs,
including nuclear decommissioning, rate-reduction-bond debt
service, the on-going cost of generation, and transition cost
recovery. The combination of a rate freeze and decreasing
costs, based upon existing ratemaking and cost recovery
periods, provides an adequate amount of revenue available
for full transition cost recovery.
PG&E has proposed to accelerate recovery for certain
transition costs related to generation facilities, including Diablo
Canyon. Additionally, PG&E would receive a reduced return on
common equity associated with generation plant assets for
which recovery is accelerated. The lower return reflects the
reduced risk associated with the shorter amortization period
and increased certainty of recovery.
In applying its cost recovery plan to Diablo Canyon, PG&E has
proposed to replace the existing settlement prices with: (1) a
sunk cost revenue requirement to recover fixed costs, includ-
ing a return on these costs, and (2) a PBR mechanism to recover
the facility's variable costs and capital addition costs. As pro-
posed, the sunk cost revenue requirement would accelerate
recovery of Diablo Canyon sunk costs from a twenty-year
period ending in 2016 to a five-year period beginning in 1997
and ending in 2001. The related return on common equity
associated with Diablo Canyon sunk costs would be reduced
to 90 percent of PG&E's long-term cost of debt. PG&E's autho-
rized long-term cost of debt was 7.52 percent in 1996. The
reduced rate of return combined with a shorter recovery
period would result in an estimated $4 billion decrease in the
net present value of PG&E's future revenues from Diablo
Canyon operations. If the proposed cost recovery plan for
Diablo Canyon were adopted during 1996, Diablo Canyon's
1996 reported net income would have been reduced by $350
million ($0.85 per share).
Most transition costs must be recovered by March 1, 2002.
However, the legislation authorizes recovery of certain transi-
tion costs after that time. These costs include: (1) certain
employee-related transition costs, (2) payments under existing
QF and power purchase contracts, and (3) unrecovered imple-
mentation costs. Excluding these exceptions, any transition
costs not recovered during the transition period will be
absorbed by PG&E. Nuclear decommissioning costs, which are
not considered transition costs, will be recovered through a
CPUC authorized charge. During the transition period, this
charge will be incorporated into the frozen rates. After the
transition period, customers will be assessed a surcharge until
the nuclear decommissioning costs are fully recovered.
PG&E's ability to recover its transition costs during the
transition period will be dependent on several factors. These
factors include: (1) the extent to which application of the cur-
rent regulatory framework established by the restructuring
legislation will continue to be applied, (2) the amount of transi-
tion costs approved by the CPUC, (3) the market value of PG&E's
generation plants, (4) future sales levels, (5) fuel and operating
costs, (6) the market price of electricity, and (7) the ratemak-
ing methodology adopted for Diablo Canyon. Considering its
current evaluation of these factors, PG&E believes it will recover
its transition costs and that its owned generation plants are
not impaired. However, a change in these factors could affect
the probability of recovery of transition costs and result in
a material loss.
PG&E has proposed to implement portions of its transition
cost recovery plan in 1997. The CPUC decision on PG&E'S 1997
Energy Cost Adjustment Clause (ECAC) application would
decrease PG&E's 1997 revenue requirement by $720 million.
This decrease would be partially offset by a $160 million rev-
enue requirement increase, provided by the legislation, for
purposes of enhancing transmission and distribution systemPG&E Corporation
Management's Discussion and Analysis of
Consolidated Results of Operations and Financial Condition
safety and reliability. This increase was approved by the CPUC
as part of PG&E's transition cost recovery plan.
Given the electric customer rate freeze, the $560 million
net revenue requirement decrease resulting from the con-
solidation of the ECAC decision and the revenue requirement
increase contemplated in the cost recovery plan would be
available for transition cost recovery. The proposed acceler-
ated recovery of Diablo Canyon would absorb an estimated
$400 million of this available revenue requirement. The remain-
ing revenue requirement would be available to recover other
transition costs.
Competitive Market Framework: In addition to transition
cost recovery, the legislation establishes the operating frame-
work for the competitive generation market in California. This
framework will consist of a power exchange (PX) and an inde-
pendent system operator (ISO). The PX, open to all electricity
providers, will conduct a competitive auction to establish the
price of electricity. The Iso will ensure system reliability and
provide all electricity generators with open and comparable
access to transmission and distribution services.
Although the PX will be available to all customers, the
legislation allows customers to bypass the PX by entering into
direct access contracts with other electricity providers, subject
to a nonbypassable transition charge. This direct access will be
available to certain customers by January 1, 1998, and will be
phased in for all remaining customers through December 31,
2001. During the transition period, PG&E will bill direct access
customers based upon fuily bundled frozen rates. Direct
access customers' bills from PG&E would then be reduced by
an amount based on the PX price and the customers' electric
usage. These customers can be billed for their usage directly
by their chosen supplier, or the supplier may contract with
PG&E to perform this billing. During the transition period, these
customers' overall electric rates will vary only to the extent
that their direct access contract price differs from the PX price.
To prevent undue influence on the PX price by any
participant in the competitive framework, PG&E has indicated it
is willing to proceed with divestiture of at least 50 percent of
its fossil-fueled power plants as directed by the CPUC. PG&E has
filed an application seeking approval from the CPUC to sell four
plants before the end of 1997. The book value for these plants
is approximately $400 million, and together they generate
approximately 10 percent of PG&E's total electric sales. PG&E
proposes to recover any shortfall in proceeds from divesti-
ture of these plants as a transition cost. Accordingly, the
Company does not expect any adverse impact on its results
of operations from the sale of these plants.
In addition to the CPUC's electric industry restructuring
discussed above, the FERC has required utilities to provide
wholesale open access to electric transmission systems on
terms that are comparable to the way utilities use their own
systems. PG&E's open access tariff, filed in July 1996, provides
access to any eligible party interested in wholesale transmis-
sion service over PG&E's transmission system. The FERC also
reaffirmed its intention to permit utilities to recover any legiti-
mate, verifiable, and prudently incurred costs stranded as a
result of customers taking advantage of wholesale open access
orders to meet their power needs from other sources.
Further, the FERC asserted that it has jurisdiction over the
transmission component of retail direct access.
12
By developing the PX and the ISO and by implementing
direct access to generation and open access to transmission,
regulators have established the operating framework of
the competitive generation and wholesale transmission mar-
kets. Although this framework will fundamentally change the
way PG&E does business, the Company does not believe that
the changes will have a material adverse impact on its ability to
recover transition costs.
Accounting for the Effects of Regulation: PG&E accounts
for the financial effects of regulation in accordance with
Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) No. 71,
"Accounting for the Effects of Certain Types of Regulation."
This statement allows the Company to record certain regula-
tory assets and liabilities that would not be recorded under
generally accepted accounting principles for nonregulated
entities. In addition, SFAS No. 121, "Accounting for the Impair-
ment of Long-Lived Assets and for Long-Lived Assets to Be
Disposed Of," requires that regulatory assets be written off
when they are no longer probable of recovery and that impair-
ment losses be recorded for long-lived assets when related
future cash flows are less than the carrying value of the asset.
As a result of applying the provisions of SFAS No. 71, PG&E
has accumulated approximately $1.6 billion of regulatory assets
attributable to electric generation at December 31, 1996.The net investments in Diablo Canyon and the other genera-
tion assets were $4.5 billion and $2.7 billion, respectively, at
December 31, 1996. The net present value of above-market
QF power purchase obligations is estimated to be $5.3 billion
at January 1, 1998, at an assumed PX price of $0.025 per
kilowatt-hour (kWh) beginning in 1997 and escalating at
3.2 percent per year.
PG&E believes that the restructuring legislation establishes a
definitive transition to market-based pricing for electric gener-
ation. Incorporating the effects of the PX and direct access, this
transition includes cost-of-service based ratemaking. In addi-
tion, PG&E's generation-related transition costs will be collected
through a nonbypassable charge. Based on this structure, PG&E
believes it will continue to meet the requirements of SFAS No.
71 throughout the transition period.
At the conclusion of the transition period, PG&E believes it
will be at risk to recover its generation costs through market-
based revenues. At that time, PG&E expects to discontinue the
application of SFAS No. 71 for the electric generation portion
of its business. Since PG&E anticipates it will have recovered all
transition costs required to be recovered during the transition
period, including generation-related regulatory assets and
above-market investments in net plant, PG&E does not expect
a material adverse impact on its financial position or results of
operations from discontinuing the application at that time.
As a result of the CPUC's restructuring decision and
California's electric industry restructuring legislation, the
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) has begun inquiries
regarding the appropriateness of the continued application of
SFAS No. 71 by California utilities to their electric generation
businesses. As discussed above, PG&E believes it currently
meets and will continue to meet the requirements to apply
SFAS No. 71 during the transition period. In the event that the
SEC concludes that the current regulatory and legal framework
in California no longer meets the requirements to apply SFAS
No. 71 to the generation business, the Company would reeval-
uate the financial impact of electric industry restructuring and
a material write-off could occur.
Given the current regulatory environment, PG&E's electric
transmission and distribution businesses are expected to
remain regulated and, as a result, will continue application of
the provisions of SFAS No. 71.
13
Gas Industry Restructuring: Restructuring of the
natural gas industry on both the national and the state level
has given customers greater options in meeting their gas sup-
ply needs. PG&E's customers may buy commodity gas directly
from competing suppliers and purchase transmission- and dis-
tribution-only services from PG&E. Transmission and distribu-
tion services have remained "bundled," or sold together at a
combined rate, within the state. PGT, as an interstate pipeline,
has provided nondiscriminatory transmission-only service
since 1993 and no longer sells commodity gas.
Most of PG&E's industrial and larger commercial (noncore)
customers purchase their commodity gas from marketers and
brokers. Substantially all residential and smaller commercial
(core) customers continue to buy commodity gas as well as
transmission and distribution from PG&E as a bundled service.
In 1995 and 1996, PG&E actively pursued changes in the
California gas industry in an effort to promote competi-
tion and increase options for all customers, as well as to posí-
tion itself for the competitive marketplace. In 1996, PG&E sub-
mitted to the CPUC the Gas Accord Settlement (Accord). The
Accord is the result of an extensive negotiation process, begun
in 1995, among a broad coalition of customer groups and
industry participants. The Accord must be approved by the
CPUC before it can be implemented. A CPUC decision is
expected in 1997.
The Accord consists of three broad initiatives:
(1) The Accord would separate, or "unbundle," PG&E's gas
transmission and storage services from its distribution services
and would change the terms of service and rate structure for
gas transportation. Unbundling would give customers the
opportunity to select from a menu of services offered by PG&E
and would enable them to pay only for the services they use.
PG&E would be at risk for variations in revenues resulting
from differences between actual and forecasted transmission
throughput. PG&E would also continue to provide cost-of-
service based distribution service, much as it does today.
(2) The Accord would increase opportunities for PG&E's core
customers to purchase gas from competing suppliers and,
therefore, could reduce PG&E's role in procuring gas for such
customers. However, PG&E would continue to procure gas as a
regulated utility supplier for those customers who request it.
The Accord also would establish principles for continuing
negotiations between PG&E and California gas producers forPG&E Corporation
the mutual release of supply contracts and the sale of
gas gath-
ering facilities. Also related to PG&E's procurement activities,
PG&E has proposed that traditional reasonableness reviews of
its core gas costs be replaced with a core procurement incen-
tive mechanism (CPIM) for the period June 1, 1994, through
2002. Under the CPIM, PG&E would be able to recover its gas
commodity and interstate transportation costs and would
receive benefits or be penalized depending on whether its
actual core procurement costs were within, below, or above a
"tolerance band" constructed around market benchmarks.
Actual core procurement costs measured for the period June
1, 1994, through December 31, 1996, have generally been
within the CPIM "tolerance band." The CPIM proposal also
requests authorization to use derivative financial instruments
to reduce the risk of gas price and foreign currency fluctua-
tions. Gains, losses, and transaction costs associated with the
use of derivative financial instruments would be included in the
purchased gas account and the measurement against the
benchmarks.
(3) The Accord would resolve various regulatory issues (see
further discussion in Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial
Statements) including:
"
Management's Discussion and Analysis of
Consolidated Results of Operations and Financial Condition
• the disallowances ordered by the CPUC in connection with
PG&E's 1988 through 1995 gas reasonableness proceedings;
• the recovery of certain capital costs associated with the PG&E
portion of the PGT/PG&E Pipeline Expansion;
·
the recovery of costs related to PG&E's capacity commitments
with Transwestern Pipeline Company through 2002; and
the recovery, through PG&E's interstate transition cost sur-
charge, of fixed demand charges paid to El Paso Natural Gas
Company and PGT for firm capacity held by PG&E on behalf of
its customers.
As of December 31, 1996, PG&E has reserved approximately
$527 million, including $182 million reserved during 1996,
relating to its gas regulatory issues and gas capacity commit-
ments, the majority of which are addressed by the Accord.
PG&E believes the ultimate resolution of these matters,
whether through approval of the Accord or otherwise, will not
have a material adverse impact on its financial position or
future results of operations.
Acquisitions and Sales: The Company has
developed strategies to focus on the unregulated independent
power generation market, the unregulated energy services
market, and the regulated and unregulated "midstream"
portions of the gas market. As a result of this focus, the
Company has been acquiring related businesses and disposing
of unrelated businesses.
Enterprises participates in multiple domestic and interna-
tional energy businesses. The majority of Enterprises' domestic
investments are in nonregulated energy projects through u.s.
Generating Company (USGen), a joint venture with Bechtel
Enterprises, Inc. (Bechtel). UsGen and its affiliates develop, own,
and operate power plants in the United States.
Enterprises' entry into the international market was also
made in partnership with Bechtel. Enterprises and Bechtel
formed International Generating Company, Ltd., (InterGen)
which develops, owns, and operates international electric gen-
eration projects. However, in November 1996, Enterprises
and Bechtel reached an agreement for Bechtel to acquire
Enterprises' interest in InterGen. The Company expects to
complete the sale in the first quarter of 1997 and realize an
after-tax gain. Enterprises has refined its international strategy
to focus on select countries and to concentrate on end-use
energy customers.
In 1995, Enterprises formed Vantus, a retail energy services
provider, to assist customers in locating the most cost-effective
electric and gas products and services. Vantus'
services
energy
include power marketing for industrial and large commercial
businesses nationwide. In 1996, Vantus opened new offices in
the western United States to establish a presence and market
its services in emerging energy markets.
Also in 1995, Enterprises sold DALEN Corporation (DALEN).
The sales price was $455 million, including $340 million cash
and the assumption of $115 million of existing debt. The sale
resulted in an after-tax gain of approximately $13 million.
14
|The Company is pursuing gas-related opportunities as the
gas industry continues to evolve. In July 1996, the Company,
through its subsidiary PGT, purchased PGT Queensland State
Gas Pipeline, a 389-mile natural gas transportation system in
the Australian state of Queensland. The final purchase price
was $136 million.
In December 1996, PGT entered the unregulated gas
marketing arena with the purchase of Energy Source (ESI), the
North American gas marketing operations of Edisto Resources
Corporation for approximately $23 million. The purchase
included most of ESI's existing contracts for the purchase, sale,
and transportation of natural gas and natural gas futures. In
1996, ESI generated over $1.1 billion in gas marketing revenues,
of which $283 million was earned in December 1996.
In January 1997, PG&E Corporation acquired Teco and its
subsidiaries for approximately $380 million. Teco is an owner
of a 500-mile natural gas pipeline system in Texas. Teco also
has investments in gas gathering and processing facilities and
owns a gas marketing company in Houston.
Also in January 1997, PG&E Corporation agreed to acquire
Valero. Valero's operations include the gathering, transporta-
tion, marketing, and storage of natural gas, the processing,
transportation, and marketing of natural gas liquids, and the
marketing of electric power. Valero operates approximately
7,500 miles of natural gas pipeline and also owns and operates
536 miles of natural gas liquid pipeline and eight natural
processing plants in Texas. PG&E Corporation will acquire
Valero for approximately $1.5 billion, comprised of approxi-
mately $720 million in PG&E Corporation common stock and
the assumption of debt and liabilities. The acquisition is
expected to be completed by mid-1997 and is subject to
applicable regulatory and shareholder approvals.
gas
All of the above acquisitions have been or will be accounted
for using the purchase method of accounting.
Results of Operations: The Company's results
of operations were derived from three business lines: utility
(excluding Diablo Canyon and including PGT's gas pipeline oper-
ations), Diablo Canyon, and diversified operations (principally,
Enterprises and ESI). The results of operations and total assets
for 1996, 1995, and 1994 are reflected in the following table
and discussed below:
15
(in millions, except per share
amounts)
1996
Operating revenues
Operating expenses
Operating Income (loss)
before income taxes
Net income (loss)
Earnings per
common share
Total assets at year end
1995
Operating revenues
Operating expenses
Operating income (loss)
before income taxes
Net income
Earnings per
common share
Total assets at year end
1994
Operating revenues
Operating expenses
Operating income (loss)
before income taxes
Net income
Earnings per
common share
Total assets at year end
Utility
$ 7,411
6,465
$ 946
MALTENE FR
$ 292
$ .65
$19,283
$ 7,601
5,820
$ 1,781
$ 820
$ 1.80
$20,090
$ 8,232
6,732
$ 1,500
$ 539
Diablo Diversified
Canyon Operations
$1,789
791
$ 998
$ 497
$ 1.18
$5,413
$1,845
816
$1,029
$ 507
$ 1.16
$5,717
$1,870
914
$ 956
$ 461
$ 410
458
$ (48) $1,896
$(34) $ 755
Total
$ 9,610
7,714
$ (.08) $ 1.75
$1,434 $26,130
$ (47)
$ 12(²)
$176 $9,622
223 6,859
$ (32)
$ 7
$2,763
$ 1,339
$ .03 $ 2.99
$1,043 $26,850
$ 248 $10,350
280 7,926
$2,424
$ 1,007
See Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for discussion
of allocations.
.. pane
$ 1.15 $ 1.04 $ .02 $ 2.21
$20,295 $5,978 $1,436 $27,709
Includes non-operating income resulting from property sales, partnership
earnings, and investment income.
Earnings Per Common Share: Earnings per common
share were $1.75, $2.99, and $2.21 for 1996, 1995, and 1994,
respectively. Utility earnings in 1996 were lower than 1995,
reflecting revenue reductions ordered in the 1996 General
Rate Case (GRC) and other related rate proceedings and
reflecting several one-time charges. The revenue reductions
resulted from a lower cost of capital, lower capital expendi-
tures, and reductions in authorized expense levels. Actual
maintenance and other operating expenses for distributionPG&E Corporation
Management's Discussion and Analysis of
Consolidated Results of Operations and Financial Condition
and customer-related services increased in 1996 and exceeded
levels authorized in the 1996 GRC. These increases were pri-
marily attributable to several projects related to transmission
and distribution system reliability, and improved customer-
related services. Additionally, PG&E recorded a charge of $.26
per common share for contingencies related to gas transporta-
tion commitments and recorded a charge of $.19 per common
share for settlement of litigation. (See Operating Expenses
below and Notes 3 and 13 to the Consolidated Financial
Statements.) Finally, the Company recorded a charge of
$.09 per common share for write-downs of nonregulated
investments.
Earnings per common share for 1995 were higher than 1994
due to fewer one-time charges against earnings than in 1994
(see Operating Expenses below). In addition, there were
fewer scheduled refueling outages at Diablo Canyon in 1995,
compared with 1994.
On a consolidated basis, the Company earned 8.5, 14.6, and
II.1 percent returns on average common stock equity for the
years ended December 31, 1996, 1995, and 1994, respectively.
PG&E has received a CPUC decision which authorizes, for 1997,
a return on common equity of 11.6 percent and an overall rate
of return of 9.45 percent. However, PG&E has filed a proposal
with the CPUC to accelerate recovery of certain transition
costs related to generation facilities, including Diablo Canyon.
Additionally, PG&E would receive a reduced return on common
equity associated with generation plant assets for which recov-
ery is accelerated. This return would equal 90 percent of
PG&E's long-term cost of debt. PG&E's authorized long-term cost
of debt was 7.52 percent in 1996. (See Electric Industry
Restructuring above.)
Common Stock Dividend: The Company's common
stock dividend is based on a number of financial considera-
tions, including sustainability, financial flexibility, and competi-
tiveness with investment opportunities of similar risk. The
Company's current quarterly common stock dividend is $.30
per common share which corresponds to an annualized divi-
dend of $1.20 per common share. This represents a decrease
from the previous annualized dividend of $1.96 per common
share. The Company has identified a dividend payout ratio
objective (dividends declared divided by earnings available for
common stock) of between 50 and 65 percent (based on
earnings exclusive of nonrecurring adjustments).
Operating Revenues: Operating revenues in 1996
decreased slightly from 1995. The decreases in utility revenues
as ordered in the 1996 GRC, discussed above, and in Diablo
Canyon revenues were offset by increased revenues from
diversified operations. Revenues from Diablo Canyon
decreased due to a decline in the generation price, as provided
in the Diablo Canyon rate case settlement as modified in 1995
(Diablo Settlement) (see Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial
Statements). This decline was partially offset by higher net gen-
eration, which was a result of fewer scheduled refuelings in
1996 compared to 1995. Revenues from diversified operations
increased primarily due to the purchase of ESI in December
1996. This purchase created $283 million of revenue but was
partially offset by a decline in revenue due to the sale of DALEN
in 1995. (See Acquisitions and Sales above.)
Operating revenues for 1995 decreased $728 million from
1994. The decrease in utility revenues was primarily due
to a decrease in electric energy costs caused by favorable
hydroelectric conditions and lower natural gas prices. Diablo
Canyon operating revenues decreased due to a decrease in the
generation price as provided in the modified Diablo Settlement
(see Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for fur-
ther discussion). This decrease was partially offset by favorable
operating revenues from Diablo Canyon resulting from fewer
refueling days in 1995. Revenues from diversified operations
decreased $72 million in 1995 compared to 1994 primarily
due to the sale of DALEN in June 1995.
16
Operating Expenses: Operating expenses increased
$855 million in 1996 compared to 1995, primarily due to: (1) a
charge of $182 million for contingencies related to gas trans-
portation commitments, (2) increases in the cost of
due to
gas
price increases, (3) increases in purchased power prices and
volumes, (4) increases in maintenance and other operating
expenses for transmission and distribution system reliability
and for improved customer-related services, (5) increases in
litigation costs, and (6) an increase in the cost of for resale
gas
due to the purchase of ESI in December 1996. The cost of
gas increase from the purchase of ESI was offset by revenues as
discussed above.
Operating expenses decreased $1,067 million in 1995 com-
pared to 1994 primarily due to decreased electric costs caused
by favorable hydroelectric conditions, decreased natural gasprices, and no workforce reduction charges in 1995. (See Note
10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.)
Other Income and (Expense); Other income and
expense changed in 1996 compared to 1995 primarily due to
write-downs of certain nonregulated investments.
Liquidity and Capital Resources:
The Company's capital requirements are funded from cash
provided from operations and, to the extent necessary, exter-
nal financing. The Company's policy is to finance its assets with
a capital structure that minimizes financing costs, maintains
financial flexibility, and complies with regulatory guidelines.
Based on cash provided from operations and its capital
requirements, the Company may repurchase equity and long-
term debt in order to manage the overall balance of its capital
structure.
Debt: In 1996, 1995, and 1994, the Company redeemed or
repurchased $1,113, $758, and $202 million, respectively, of
long-term debt to manage the overall balance of the Com-
pany's capital structure. Long-term debt maturing during 1996,
1995, and 1994 was not refinanced.
Included in the 1996 repurchases is $988 million of variable
and fixed interest rate pollution control mortgage bonds and
loan agreements which were replaced with variable interest
rate pollution control loan agreements. Also in 1996, the
Company entered into additional loan agreements of $92 mil-
lion to finance the PGT acquisition of PGT Queensland State
Gas Pipeline. In addition, the Company used its cash balances
to reduce short-term borrowings by $115 million in 1996.
In 1995, PGT issued $400 million of bonds and $70 million of
medium-term notes. In addition, PGT issued commercial paper
which is classified as long-term debt. This classification is based
upon the availability of committed credit facilities expiring in
2000 and management's intent to maintain such amounts in
excess of one year. The commercial paper outstanding was
$108 and $109 million at December 31, 1996, and 1995,
respectively. Substantially all of the proceeds of PGT's debt
issued in 1995 were used to refinance outstanding debt.
PG&E issues short-term debt (principally commercial paper)
to fund fuel oil, nuclear fuel, and gas inventories, unrecovered
balances in balancing accounts, and cyclical fluctuations in daily
cash flows. At December 31, 1996, and 1995, PG&E had $681
and $796 million, respectively, of commercial paper outstand-
ing. PG&E maintains a $1 billion revolving credit facility which
primarily provides support for PG&E's commercial paper
issuance. At maturity, commercial paper can be either reissued
or replaced with borrowings from this credit facility. The facil-
ity can also be used for general corporate purposes. There
were no borrowings under this facility in 1996, 1995, or 1994.
In January 1997, PG&E Corporation established a $500 mil-
lion revolving credit facility in order to provide for corporate
short-term liquidity needs and other purposes.
As discussed in electric industry restructuring above, to
achieve the 10 percent rate reduction for residential and small
commercial customers, the electric industry restructuring
legislation authorizes utilities to finance a portion of the
transition costs with "rate reduction bonds." PG&E expects to
work with state authorities to coordinate the issuance of up to
$2.5 billion of these bonds by a special purpose entity. Once
issued, PG&E would collect, on behalf of the special purpose
entity, a separate tariff to recover principal, interest, and
issuance costs over the life of the bonds from residential
and small commercial customers. PG&E does not expect to
secure the bonds with the Company's assets or unrelated
future revenues.
Equity: In 1996, 1995, and 1994, PG&E received $220, $140,
and $274 million, respectively, in proceeds from the sale of
common stock under the employee Savings Fund Plan, the
Dividend Reinvestment Plan, and the employee Long-term
Incentive Program.
Since 1993, the Board has authorized the Company to
repurchase up to $2 billion of its common stock on the open
market or in negotiated transactions. These repurchases are
funded by internally generated funds and are used to manage
the overall balance of common stock in the Company's capital
structure. Through December 31, 1996, the Company had
repurchased approximately $1.5 billion of its common stock
under this program. Repurchases for 1996, 1995, and 1994
were $455, $601, and $182 million, respectively.
In 1996, PG&E did not redeem or repurchase any preferred
stock. In 1995 and 1994, PG&E redeemed or repurchased
$331 and $75 million, respectively, of its higher-cost preferred
stock. In 1994, PG&E issued $62 million of preferred stock.
PG&E is limited as to the amount of dividends that it may
pay to PG&E Corporation based on PG&E's regulatory capitalManagement's Discussion and Analysis of
Consolidated Results of Operations and Financial Condition
structure authorized by the CPUC. PG&E's equity shall be
retained such that, on average, the capital structure authorized
by the CPUC is maintained. This restriction is not expected to
affect PG&E Corporation's ability to meet its cash obligations.
Other Capital: In 1995, PG&E through its wholly-owned
subsidiary, PG&E Capital I, issued $300 million of cumulative
quarterly income preferred securities. Net proceeds were
used to redeem and repurchase higher-cost preferred stock.
Investing Activities: The Company's estimated capital
requirements for the next three years are shown below:
Year ended December 31,
(in millions)
Utility (including PGT)
Diablo Canyon
Diversified operations
Total capital expenditures
Maturing debt and sinking funds
Total capital requirements
PG&E Corporation
1997
$1,773
38
211
2,022
210
$2,232
1998
1999
$1,825 $1,705
39
41
172
80
1,918
1,944
660
270
$2,604 $2,188
Utility and Diablo Canyon expenditures will be primarily for
improvements to the Company's facilities to enhance their effi-
ciency and reliability, to extend their useful lives, and to comply
with environmental laws and regulations.
Expenditures for diversified operations (consisting primarily
of Enterprises) include capital contributions for Enterprises'
equity share of generating facility projects. Ongoing capital
expenditures for Teco are included in diversified operations in
the above estimated capital requirements.
In addition to the above, the Company, in January 1997,
has acquired Teco for approximately $380 million, consisting
of a note payable of $61 million and $319 million of PG&E
Corporation's common stock. Further, the Company, in January
1997, agreed to acquire Valero for approximately $1.5 billion,
consisting of approximately $720 million of PG&E Corporation's
common stock and the assumption of debt and liabilities. The
Company has other commitments as discussed in Notes 3 and
12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
In December 1995, the Company had a balance of $734 mil-
lion of cash and cash equivalents due to the sale of DALEN and
the retention of cash for potential investments.
Risk Management: Due to the changing business environ-
ment, the Company's exposure to risks associated with
changes in energy commodity prices, interest rates, and foreign
currencies is increasing. To manage these risks, the Company
has adopted a price risk management policy and established an
officer-level price risk management committee. The Company's
price risk management committee oversees implementation
of the policy, approves each price risk management program,
and monitors compliance with the policy.
The Company's price risk management policy and proce-
dures adopted by the committee establish guidelines for imple-
mentation of price risk management programs. Such programs
may include the use of energy and financial derivatives. (A
derivative is a contract whose value is dependent on or
derived from the value of some underlying asset.) Additionally,
the Company's policy allows derivatives to be used for hedging
and non-hedging purposes. (Hedging is the process of protect-
ing one transaction by means of another to reduce price risk.)
Both hedging and non-hedging activities are limited to those
specifically approved by the committee only after appropriate
controls and procedures are put in place to measure, monitor,
and control the risk of such activities. The Company's policy
prohibits the use of derivatives whose payment formula
includes a multiple of some underlying asset.
In 1996, the Company approved and implemented interest
rate and foreign exchange risk management programs, applied
for regulatory approval to use energy derivatives to manage
commodity price risk in its utility business, and acquired
certain natural gas marketing operations which engage in
both hedging and non-hedging derivative transactions. Gains
and losses associated with price risk management activities
during 1996 were immaterial.
18
Environmental Matters: The Company's projected
expenditures for environmental protection are subject to
periodic review and revision to reflect changing technology
and evolving regulatory requirements. Capital expenditures
for environmental protection are currently estimated to be
approximately $36, $50, and $72 million for 1997, 1998, and
1999, respectively. Expenditures during these years will be pri-
marily for nitrogen oxide (NOx) emission reduction projects
at the Company's fossil fuel generating plants and natural gas
compressor stations. Pursuant to federal and state legislation,local air districts have adopted rules that require reductions in
NOx emissions. These rules are subject to continued review
and modification by the local air districts in which PG&E oper-
ates. The Company currently estimates that compliance
with NOX rules could require capital expenditures of up to
$360 million over the next ten years.
On an ongoing basis, the Company assesses compliance
with laws and regulations related to hazardous substance
remediation. The Company has an accrued liability at
December 31, 1996, of $170 million for remediation costs at
sites where such costs are probable and quantifiable. The costs
at identified sites may be as much as $400 million if, among
other things, other potentially responsible parties are not
financially able to contribute to these costs, or identifiable pos-
sible outcomes change. The Company will seek recovery of
prudently incurred compliance costs through ratemaking pro-
cedures approved by the CPUC. The Company has recorded
a regulatory asset at December 31, 1996, of $146 million
for recovery of these costs in future rates. Additionally,
the Company will seek recovery of costs from insurance
carriers and from other third parties. (See Note 13 to the
Consolidated Financial Statements.)
Effective January 1, 1997, the Company will adopt the
provisions of the American Institute of Certified Public
Accountants' Statement of Position (SOP) 96-1, Environmental
Remediation Liabilities. This SOP provides authoritative guid-
ance for recognition, measurement, display, and disclosure of
environmental remediation liabilities in financial statements,
The adoption of SOP 96-1 is not expected to have a material
adverse impact on the Company's financial position or results
of operations.
Legal Matters: In the normal course of business, the
Company is named as a party in a number of claims and law-
suits. Substantially all of these have been litigated or settled
with no material adverse impact on either the Company's
results of operations or financial position. In addition, the
Company believes that the litigation or settlement of pending
claims and lawsuits will not have a material adverse impact on
its results of operations or financial position. See Note 13 to
the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of
significant pending legal matters.
Accounting for Decommissioning Expense:
In 1996, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued an
exposure draft on a proposed SFAS entitled "Accounting for
Certain Liabilities Related to Closure or Removal of Long-
Lived Assets." If this exposure draft is adopted: (1) annual
expense for power plant decommissioning could increase, and
(2) the estimated total cost for power plant decommissioning
could be recorded as a liability, with recognition of an increase
in the cost of the related power plant, rather than accrued
over time as accumulated depreciation. The Company does
not believe that this change, if implemented as proposed,
would have a material adverse impact on its results of
operations due to its current and future ability to recover
decommissioning costs through rates. (See Note 2 to the
Consolidated Financial Statements for discussion of electric
industry restructuring.)
Inflation: The Company's rates are designed to recover
operating and historical plant investment costs. Financial
statements, which are prepared in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles, report operating
results in terms of historic costs and do not evaluate the
impact of inflation,
Inflation affects the Company's construction costs, operating
expenses, and interest charges. Due to the Company's five-
year electric rate freeze, electric revenues will not reflect the
impact of inflation. However, inflation at the levels currently
being experienced is not expected to have a material adverse
impact on the Company's future results of operations.Year ended December 31.
(in thousands, except per share amounts)
Operating Revenues
Electric utility
Gas utility
Diversified operations
Total operating revenues
Operating Expenses
Cost of electric energy
Cost of gas
Maintenance and other operating
Depreciation and decommissioning
Administrative and general
Workforce reduction costs
Property and other taxes
Total operating expenses
Operating Income
Interest income
Interest expense
Other income and (expense)
Pretax Income
Income Taxes
PG&E Corporation
Statement of Consolidated Income
Net Income
Preferred dividend requirement and redemption premium
Earnings Available for Common Stock
Weighted Average Common Shares Outstanding
Earnings Per Common Share
Dividends Declared Per Common Share
The accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements are an integral part of this statement.
20
1996
$7,160,215
2,039,802
409,955
9,609,972
2,303,488
761,837
2,118,174
1,221,952
1,016,439
292,497
7,714,387
1,895,585
72,900
(639,823)
(18,459)
1,310,203
554,994
755,209
33,113
$ 722,096
$
$
412,542
1.75
1.77
1995
$7,386,307
2,059,117
176,341
9,621,765
2,116,840
333,280
1,799,781
1,360,118
971,576
(18,195)
295,380
6,858,780
2,762,985
72,524
(688,408)
87,073
2,234,174
895,289
1,338,885
70,288
$1,268,597
423,692
2,99
1.96
$
$
$ 8,021,547
2,081,062
247,621
10,350,230
$
1994
$
$
2,570,723
583,356
1,855,585
1,397,470
973,302
249,097
296,9||
7,926,444
2,423,786
79,643
(729,207)
69,995
1,844,217
836,767
1,007,450
57,603
949,847
429,846
2.21
1.96Year ended December 31,
(in thousands)
Cash Flows From Operating Activities
Net income
PG&E Corporation
Statement of Consolidated Cash Flows
Adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by
operating activities
Depreciation and decommissioning
Amortization
Deferred income taxes and tax credits-net
Other deferred charges
Other noncurrent liabilities
Noncurrent balancing account liabilities and other deferred credits
Net effect of changes in operating assets and liabilities
Accounts receivable
Regulatory balancing accounts receivable
Inventories
Accounts payable
Accrued taxes
Other working capital
Other net
Net cash provided by operating activities
Cash Flows From Investing Activities
Capital expenditures
Diversified operations
Acquisition of PGT Queensland Gas Pipeline
Acquisition of Energy Source
Proceeds from sale of DALEN
Other-net
Net cash used by investing activities
Cash Flows From Financing Activities
Common stock issued
Common stock repurchased
Preferred stock issued
Preferred stock redeemed or repurchased
Company obligated mandatorily redeemable preferred securities issued
Long-term debt issued
Long-term debt matured, redeemed, or repurchased
Short-term debt issued (redeemed)-net
Dividends paid
Other-net
Net cash used by financing activities
Net Change in Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and Cash Equivalents at January I
Cash and Cash Equivalents at December 31
Supplemental disclosures of cash flow information
Cash paid for
Interest (net of amounts capitalized)
Income taxes
The accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements are an integral part of this statement.
21
1996
$ 755,209
1,221,952
93,948
(149,990)
94,475
113,244
(185,390)
(46,368)
302,188
32,043
193,012
36,014
(6,234)
156,773
2,610,876
(1,230,331)
(99,532)
(136,227)
(23,270)
(119,923)
(1,609,283)
219,726
(455,278)
1,087,732
(1,471,390)
(115,243)
(843,997)
(14,036)
(1,592,486)
(590,893)
734,295
$ 143,402
$ 598,394
639,813
1995
$1,338,885
1,360,118
89,353
(116,069)
61,700
(17,218)
(69,787)
212,515
498,756
32,409
49,702
(162,374)
8,304
50,423
3,336,717
(944,618)
(178,874)
340,000
(122,913)
(906,405)
139,595
(601,360)
(358,212)
300,000
591,160
(1,296,549)
305,262
(891,270)
(21,543)
(1,832,917)
597,395
136,900
$ 734,295
$ 644,978
1,125,635
1994
$1,007,450
1,397,470
95,331
15,312
32,740
181,902
316,920
(116,936)
(269,250)
66,783
(110,033)
132,892
5,821
191,285
2,947,687
(1,126,904)
(308,810)
(29,914)
(1,465,628)
274,269
(181,558)
62,312
(82,875)
60,907
(436,673)
(239,478)
(891,850)
28,721
(1,406,225)
75,834
61,066
$ 136,900
674,758
712,777December 31,
(in thousands)
Assets
Plant in Service
Electric
Nonnuclear
Diablo Canyon
Gas
Total plant in service (at original cost)
Accumulated depreciation and decommissioning
Net plant in service
Construction Work in Progress
Other Nancurrent Assets
Nuclear decommissioning funds
Investment in nonregulated projects
Other assets
Total other noncurrent assets
Current Assets
Cash and cash equivalents
Accounts receivable, net
Regulatory balancing accounts receivable
Inventories
Materials and supplies
Gas stored underground
Fuel oil
Nuclear fuel
Prepayments
Total current assets
Deferred Charges
Income tax-related deferred charges
Other deferred charges
Total deferred charges
Total Assets
PG&E Corporation
Consolidated Balance Sheet
The accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements are an integral part of this statement.
22
|
1996
$18,099,342
6,658,137
8,138,106
32,895,585
(14,301,934)
18,593,651
414,229
882,929
817,259
134,271
1,834,459
143,402
1,499,674
444,156
185,771
130,229
23,433
190,652
54,16
2,671,433
1,133,043
1,483,110
2,616,153
$26,129,925
1995
$17,530,446
6,646,853
7,732,681
31,909,980
(13,311,500)
18,598,480
333,263
769,829
855,962
130, 128
1,755,919
734,295
1,268,936
746,344
181,763
146,499
40,756
175,957
47,025
3,341,575
1,079,673
1,741,380
2,821,053
$26,850,290December 31,
(in thousands)
Capitalization and Liabilitles
Capitalization
Total capitalization
Common stock equity
Preferred stock without mandatory redemption provisions
Preferred stack with mandatory redemption provisions
Company obligated mandatorily redeemable preferred securities of trust
holding solely PG&E subordinated debentures
Long-term debt
Current Liabilities
Short-term borrowings
Current portion of long-term debt
Accounts payable
Trade creditors
Other
Accrued taxes
Amounts due customers
Deferred income taxes
Interest payable
Dividends payable
Other
PG&E Corporation
Consolidated Balance Sheet
Total current liabilities
Deferred Credits and Other Noncurrent Liabilities
Deferred income taxes
Deferred tax credits
Noncurrent balancing account liabilities
Other
Total Capitalization and Liabilities
Total deferred credits and other noncurrent liabilities
Commitments and Contingencies (Notes 1, 2, 3, 12, and 13)
23
|
1996
$ 8,363,301
402,056
137,500
300,000
7,770,067
16,972,924
680,900
209,867
834,143
365,499
310,271
186,899
157,064
63,193
123,310
309,104
3,240,250
3,941,435
379,563
120,858
1,474,895
5,916,751
$26,129,925
1995
$ 8,599,133
402,056
137,500
300,000
8,048,546
17,487,235
829,947
304,204
413,972
387,747
274,093
49,175
227,782
70,179
205,467
455,798
3,218,364
3,933,765
393,255
185,647
1,632,024
6,144,691
$26,850,290Statement of Consolidated Common Stock Equity, Preferred Stock, and Preferred Securities
(dollars in thousands)
Balance December 31, 1993
Net income
Common stock issued
(10,508,483 shares)
Common stock repurchased
(7,485,001 shares)
Preferred stock issued
(2,500,000 shares)
Preferred stock redeemed
(3,000,000 shares)
Cash dividends declared
Preferred stock
Common stock
Other
Balance December 31, 1994
Net income
Common stock issued
(5,316,876 shares)
Common stock repurchased
(21,533,977 shares)
Preferred securities issued
(12,000,000 shares)
Preferred stock redeemed or
repurchased (13,237,554 shares)
Cash dividends declared
Preferred stock
Common stock
Other
Balance December 31, 1995
Net income
Common stock issued
(9,290,102 shares)
Common stock repurchased
(19,811,396 shares)
Cash dividends declared
Preferred stock
Common stock
Other
Balance December 31, 1996
Common
Stock
$2,136,095
52,543
(37,425)
2,151,213
PG&E Corporacion
2,070,128
46,448
Additional
Paid-in
Capital
$3,666,455 $2,643,487
1,007,450
221,726
(66,334)
(188)
(5,331)
26,584
(107,669) (195,383)
(9,820)
3,806,508
113,011
(7,814)
3,716,322
173,278
(99,055) (182,088)
Reinvested
Earnings
(77,799)
24
(2,544)
(58,203)
(840,627)
5,540
2,677,304
1,338,885
(19,459)
(56,006)
(829,828)
95
(174,135)
(33,113)
(728,727)
2,381
3,970
$2,017,521 $3,709,893 $2,635,887
2,812,683
755,209
Total
Common
Stock
Equity
$8,446,037
1,007,450
274,269
(181,558)
(188)
(298,308) (601,360)
(7,875)
(58,203)
(840,627)
(4,280)
8,635,025
1,338,885
139,595
8,599,133
755,209
219,726
(455,278)
(33,113)
(728,727)
6,351
$8,363,301
™ Relates to company obligated mandatorily redeemable preferred securities of trust holding solely PG&E subordinated debentures.
The accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements are an Integral part of this statement.
Preferred
Stock
Without
Mandatory
Redemption
Provisions
$ 807,995
(27,273) (330,939)
(56,006)
(829,828)
95
(75,000)
732,995
402,056
$ 402,056
=
Preferred!
Stock
With
Mandatory
Redemption
Provisions
$ 75,000
62,500
137,500
300,000
437,500
$437,500December 31,
(dollars in thousands, except per share amounts)
Common Stock Equity
Common stock, par value $5 per share (authorized 800,000,000 shares, issued and
outstanding 403,504,292 and 414,025,856)
Additional paid-in capital
Reinvested earnings
Common stock equity
Preferred Stack and Preferred Securities
Preferred stock without mandatory redemption provisions
Par value $25 per share
Statement of Consolidated Capitalization
Nonredeemable
5% to 6% 5,784,825 shares outstanding
Redeemable
4.36% to 7.44% -10,297,404 shares outstanding
Total preferred stock without mandatory redemption provisions
Preferred stock with mandatory redemption provisions
Par value $25 per share
6.30% and 6.57% -5,500,000 shares outstanding, due 2002-2009
Preferred stock
Company obligated mandatorily redeemable preferred securities of trust holding
solely PG&E subordinated debentures
7.90% -12,000,000 shares outstanding, due 2025
Long-Term Debt
PG&E long-term debt
First and refunding mortgage bonds
Maturity
1996-2001
2002-2006
2007-2012
2013-2019
2020-2026
PG&E Corporation
Principal amounts outstanding
Unamortized discount net of premium
Interest rates
4.50% to 8.75%
5.875% to 7.875%
6.25% to 8.875%
7.5% to 8.2%
5.85% to 8.875%
Total mortgage bonds
Debentures, 12%, due 2000
Pollution control loan agreements, variable rates, due 2016-2026
Unsecured medium-term notes, 4.93% to 9.9%, due 1997-2014
Unamortized discount related to unsecured medium-term notes
Other long-term debt
Total PG&E long-term debt
Long-term debt of PGT and Enterprises
Total long-term debt
Less current portion
Total Capitalization
Long-term debt, excluding current portion
">Authorized 75,000,000 shares in total (both with and without mandatory redemption provisions).
The accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements are an integral part of this statement.
25
1996
$ 2,017,521
3,709,893
2,635,887
8,363,301
144,621
257,435
402,056
137,500
539,556
300,000
880,450
1,392,135
475,000
45,000
2,627,736
5,420,321
(49,923)
5,370,398
57,539
987,870
828,900
(1,187)
32,800
7,276,320
703,614
7,979,934
209,867
7,770,067
$16,972,924
1995
$ 2,070,128
3,716,322
2,812,683
8,599,133
144,621
257,435
402,056
137,500
539,556
300,000
I
915,249
1,450,000
477,870
105,000
2,749,651
5,697,770
(55,802)
5,641,968
57,539
925,000
1,096,400
(1,652)
20,298
7,739,553
613,197
8,352,750
304,204
8,048,546
$17,487,235(In thousands)
1996
Operating revenues
Intersegment revenues
Total operating revenues
Depreciation and decommissioning
Operating income before
income taxes (²)
Capital expenditures
Identifiable assets(³)
Corporate assets
Total assets at year end
1995
Operating revenues
Intersegment revenues
Total operating revenues
Depreciation and decommissioning
Operating income before
income taxes(2²)
Capital expenditures(3)
Identifiable assets (³)
Corporate assets
Total assets at year end
1994
PG&E Corporation
Statement of Consolidated Segment Information
Operating revenues
Intersegment revenues(¹)
Total operating revenues
Depreciation and decommissioning
Operating income before
income taxes (²)
Capital expenditures(3)
Identifiable assets(³)
Corporate assets
Total assets at year end
Electric
Utility
$ 7,160,215
12,156
$ 7,172,371
919,958
1,757,611
921,425
$18,005,105
$ 7,386,307
12,678
$ 7,398,985
$ 1,007,467
2,267,193
679,866
$18,610,610
$ 8,021,547
12,852
$ 8,034,399
$ 982,859
2,187,569
834,494
$19,637,222
Gas
Utility
$2,039,802
69,645
$2,109,447
$ 288,994
184,506
459,074
$6,215,028
$2,059,117
85,356
$2,144,473
$ 306,717
540,378
282,724
$6,064,596
$2,081,062
85,341
$2,166,403
$ 295,979
271,537
292,000
$6,167,314
26
Diversified
Operations
$ 409,955
$ 409,955
$ 13,000
(47,921)
23,270
$1,434,216
$ 176,341
$ 176,341
$ 45,934
(46,618)
2,067
$1,042,764
$ 247,621
$ 247,621
$ 118,632
(32,093)
19,456
$1,436,128
Intersegment
Eliminations
(81,801)
$(81,801)
$
1,389
(98,034)
$(98,034)
$
2,032
(98,193)
$(98,193)
(3,227)
P
Total
$ 9,609,972
$ 9,609,972
$ 1,221,952
1,895,585
1,403,769
$25,654,349
475,576
$26,129,925
$ 9,621,765
$ 9,621,765
$ 1,360,118
2,762,985
964,657
$25,717,970
1,132,320
$26,850,290
$10,350,230
!"Intersegment electric and gas revenues are accounted for at tariff rates prescribed by the CPUC.
General corporate expenses are allocated in accordance with FERC Uniform System of Accounts and requirements of the CPUC.
Includes an allocation of common plant in service and allowance for funds used during construction.
"Represents the nonregulated operations of wholly-owned subsidiaries including Enterprises, Mission Trail Insurance Ltd. (liability insurance), and Energy Source
(gas marketing).
The accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements are an integral part of this schedule.
$10,350,230
$ 1,397,470
2,423,786
1,145,950
$27,240,664
467,900
$27,708,564PG&E Corporation
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Note I: Significant Accounting Policies
Corporate Restructuring: Effective January 1, 1997,
Pacific Gas and Electric Company (PG&E) became a subsidiary
of its new parent holding company, PG&E Corporation. PG&E's
ownership interest in Pacific Gas Transmission Company (PGT)
and PG&E Enterprises (Enterprises) was transferred to PG&E
Corporation. PG&E's outstanding common stock was converted
on a share-for-share basis into PG&E Corporation's outstanding
common stock. PG&E's debt securities and preferred stock
were unaffected and remain securities of PG&E. The members
of PG&E's current Board of Directors became directors of
PG&E Corporation.
Basis of Presentation: The consolidated financial
statements include the accounts of PG&E and its wholly-owned
and controlled subsidiaries (collectively, the Company) and,
therefore, also represent the accounts of PG&E Corporation
and its subsidiaries. All significant intercompany transactions
have been eliminated. Certain amounts in the prior years'
consolidated financial statements have been reclassified to
conform to the 1996 presentation.
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with
generally accepted accounting principles requires manage-
ment to make estimates and assumptions. These estimates
and assumptions affect the reported amounts of revenues,
expenses, assets, and liabilities and disclosure of contingencies.
Actual results could differ from these estimates.
Operations: The Company and its subsidiaries provide
electric and natural gas services and retail energy services.
PG&E is a regulated public utility which provides generation,
procurement, transmission, and distribution of electricity
and natural gas throughout most of Northern and Central
California. PGT transports gas from the Canadian border to
the California border and the Pacific Northwest. PGT also
has operations in Australia and Texas. Enterprises, through
its subsidiaries and affiliates, develops, owns, and operates
electric and gas projects and provides energy services.
Regulation: PG&E is regulated by the California Public
Utilities Commission (CPUC), the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission (FERC), and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission,
among others. PG&E currently accounts for the economic
effects of regulation in accordance with Statement of Financial
27
Accounting Standards (SFAS) No. 71, "Accounting for the
Effects of Certain Types of Regulation." This statement allows
the Company to record certain regulatory assets and liabilities
which would be included in future rates and would not be
recorded under generally accepted accounting principles for
nonregulated entities.
Effective January 1, 1996, the Company adopted SFAS No.
121,"Accounting for the Impairment of Long-Lived Assets and
for Long-Lived Assets to Be Disposed Of" SFAS No. 121 pre-
scribes general standards for the recognition and measurement
of impairment losses. In addition, it requires that regulatory
assets continue to be probable of recovery in rates, rather
than only at the time the regulatory asset is recorded.
Regulatory assets currently recorded would be written off if
recovery is no longer probable. Adoption of this standard had
no material impact on the Company's financial position or
results of operations.
On an ongoing basis, PG&E reviews its regulatory assets and
liabilities for the continued applicability of SFAS No. 71 and the
effect of SFAS No. 121. (See Note 2 for further discussion.)
Net regulatory assets and liabilities include the following:
December 31,
(in millions)
Deferred income tax
Unamortized loss net of gain on reacquired
debt
Diablo Canyon pre-settlement costs
Workers' compensation and disability claims
costs
Regulatory balancing accounts (net)
Other deferred (net)
1996
$1,133
377
364
288
323
267
$2,752
1995
$1,080
392
382
297
561
474
$3,186
Revenues and Regulatory Balancing Accounts:
Revenues are recorded primarily for delivery of gas and
electric energy to customers. Electric and gas utility revenues
include amounts for services rendered but unbilled at the end
of the year. Revenues also are recorded for changes in regula-
tory balancing accounts established by the CPUC. Specifically,
sales balancing accounts accumulate differences between
authorized and actual base revenues. Energy cost balancing
accounts accumulate differences between the actual cost of
gas and electric energy and the revenues designated for
recovery of such costs. Recovery of gas and electric energy
costs through energy cost balancing accounts is subject toPG&E Corporation
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
reasonableness reviews by the CPUC. The regulatory balancing
accounts accumulate balances until they are refunded to
or received from utility customers through authorized
rate adjustments.
Dividend Restriction: PG&E is limited as to the amount
of dividends that it may pay to PG&E Corporation based on
PG&E's regulatory capital structure authorized by the CPUC.
PG&E's equity shall be retained such that, on average, the capital
structure authorized by the CPUC is maintained. This restric-
tion is not expected to affect PG&E Corporation's ability to
meet its cash obligations.
Financial Derivative Instruments (Derivatives):
The Company engages in price risk management activities to
manage risks associated with changes in energy commodity
prices, interest rates, and foreign currencies. These price risk
management activities include the use of derivatives.
Gains and losses on derivatives used for hedging purposes
are intended to offset losses and gains on the underlying
hedged item. Under hedge accounting, changes in the market
value of these transactions are deferred and recognized as an
addition to the income or expense of the underlying instru-
ment upon completion of the underlying transaction. All 1996
transactions were accounted for using hedge accounting. Gains
and losses associated with derivative transactions during 1996
were immaterial.
Plant in Service: The cost of plant additions and replace-
ments includes labor, materials, construction overhead, and an
allowance for funds used during construction (AFUDC) or capi-
talized interest. AFUDC is the estimated cost of debt and equity
funds used to finance regulated plant additions. Capitalized
interest is the interest incurred on borrowed funds used to
finance nonregulated plant additions. The original cost of
retired plant and removal costs less salvage value is charged to
accumulated depreciation upon retirement of plant in service.
Plant in service is depreciated using a straight-line remain-
ing-life method. The Company's composite depreciation rates
were 3.65, 4.09, and 4.31 percent for the years ended
December 31, 1996, 1995, and 1994.
Nuclear Decommissioning Costs: The estimated
total obligation for decommissioning PG&E's nuclear power
28
facilities is comprised of the total cost (including labor, materi-
als, and other costs) of decommissioning and dismantling
plant systems and structures. In addition, a contingency
amount for possible changes in regulatory requirements and
increases in waste disposal costs is included in the estimated
total obligation.
The estimated total obligation for nuclear decommissioning
costs, based on a 1994 site study, is approximately $1.2 billion
in 1996 dollars (or $5.9 billion in future dollars). Actual
decommissioning costs are expected to vary from this esti-
mate because of changes in assumed dates of decommis-
sioning, regulatory requirements, technology, and costs of
labor, materials, and equipment. The estimated total obliga-
tion is being recognized proportionately over the license
of each facility.
For the years ended December 31, 1996, 1995, and 1994,
nuclear decommissioning costs recovered in rates through an
annual allowance were $33, $54, and $54 million, respectively.
Based on the 1994 site study, the amount assumed to be
recovered in rates in 1997 and annually up to the commence-
ment of decommissioning is $33 million. This amount will be
reviewed in future rate proceedings.
At December 31, 1996, the total nuclear decommissioning
obligation accrued was $889 million and was included in the
balance sheet classification of Accumulated Depreciation and
Decommissioning.
Decommissioning costs recovered in rates are placed in
external trust funds. These funds along with accumulated earn-
ings will be used exclusively for decommissioning. (See Note 8
for further discussion of nuclear decommissioning funds.)
Decommissioning is scheduled to begin for Diablo Canyon
Nuclear Power Plant's (Diablo Canyon) Unit I and Unit 2 in
2015 and 2016, respectively, with scheduled completion for
both units in 2034. The decommissioning method selected for
Diablo Canyon anticipates that the facilities will be decontami-
nated to a level that permits the property to be released for
unrestricted use.
Decommissioning for Humboldt Bay Power Plant is
scheduled to begin in 2015. The decommissioning method
selected consists of placing and maintaining the facility in
protective storage until some future time when dismantling
can be initiated.
PG&E, as required by federal law, has signed a contract
with the u.s. Department of Energy (DOE) to provide for thedisposal of spent nuclear fuel and high-level radioactive waste
from PG&E's nuclear power facilities beginning not later than
January 1998. However, due to delays in identifying a storage
site, the DOE has officially acknowledged that it will not be able
to meet its contract commitment. The DOE's current estimate
for an available site to begin accepting physical possession of
the spent nuclear fuel is 2010.
At the projected level of operation for Diablo Canyon,
PG&E's facilities are sufficient to store on-site all spent fuel
produced through approximately 2006. It is likely that an
interim or permanent DOE storage facility will not be available
for Diablo Canyon's spent fuel by 2006. PG&E is examining
options for providing additional temporary spent fuel storage
at Diablo Canyon or other facilities, pending disposal or stor-
age at a DOE facility.
Gains and Losses on Reacquired Debt: Gains and
losses on reacquired debt charged to operations subject to the
provisions of SFAS No. 71 are deferred and amortized over the
remaining original lives of the debt reacquired, consistent with
ratemaking principles. Gains and losses on reacquired debt
associated with other operations are recognized in earnings at
the time such debt is reacquired.
Inventories: Stored nuclear fuel inventory is stated at
lower of average cost or market. Nuclear fuel in the reactor
is amortized based on the amount of energy output. Other
inventories are valued at average cost except for fuel oil, which
is valued by the last-in-first-out method.
Cash Equivalents: Cash equivalents (stated at cost, which
approximates market) include working funds and short-term
investments with original maturities of three months or less.
Note 2: Electric Industry Restructuring
In 1995, the CPUC issued a decision that provides a plan to
restructure California's electric utility industry. The decision
acknowledges that much of utilities' current costs and commit-
ments result from past CPUC decisions and that, in a competi-
tive generation market, utilities would not recover some of
these costs through market-based revenues. To assure the
continued financial integrity of California utilities, the CPUC
authorized recovery of these above-market costs, called
"transition costs."
29
In 1996, California legislation was passed that adopts the
basic tenets of the CPUC's restructuring decision, including
recovery of transition costs. In addition, the legislation pro-
vides a 10 percent rate reduction for residential and small
commercial customers by January 1, 1998, freezes electric
customer rates for all other customers, and requires the
accelerated recovery of transition costs associated with
owned generation facilities. The legislation also establishes the
operating framework for a competitive generation market.
The rate freeze will continue until the earlier of March 31,
2002, or until PG&E has recovered its transition costs (the tran-
sition period). The freeze will hold rates at 1996 levels for all
customers except those receiving the 10 percent rate reduc-
tion. The rate freeze will hold the rates for these customers at
the reduced level.
To achieve the 10 percent rate reduction, the legislation
authorizes utilities to finance a portion of their transition costs
with "rate reduction bonds." The maturity period of the bonds
is expected to extend beyond the transition period. Also, the
interest cost of the bonds is expected to be lower than PG&E's
current cost of capital. Once this portion of transition costs
is financed, PG&E would collect a bond service payment to
recover principal, interest, and issuance costs over the life of
the bonds from residential and small commercial customers.
The combination of the longer maturity period and the
reduced interest costs will lower the amounts paid by these
customers each year during the transition period thereby
achieving the 10 percent reduction in rates.
Tax-exempt trusts have been established to oversee the
development of the operating framework for the competitive
generation market. The cpuc has authorized California utilities
to guarantee bank loans of up to $250 million to be used by
the trusts for this purpose. Under this authorization, PG&E will
guarantee a maximum of $112.5 million of these loans.
Transition Cost Recovery: The legislation authorizes
the CPUC to determine the costs eligible for recovery as transi-
tion costs. The amount of costs will be based on the aggregate
of above-market and below-market values of utility-owned
generation assets and obligations. PG&E has proposed that costs
eligible for transition cost recovery include: (1) above-market
sunk costs (costs associated with utility generating facilities
that are fixed and unavoidable and currently collected through
rates) and future costs, such as costs related to plant removal,PG&E Corporation
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
(2) above-market costs associated with purchase power obliga-
tions with Qualifying Facilities (QFS) and other Power Purchase
Agreements, and (3) generation-related regulatory assets and
obligations. PG&E cannot determine the exact amount of sunk
costs that will be above market and recoverable as transition
costs until a market valuation process (appraisal or sale) is
completed for each generation facility. This process will be
completed during the transition period.
Most transition costs must be recovered by March 1, 2002.
However, the legislation authorizes recovery of certain transi-
tion costs after that time. These costs include: (1) certain
employee-related transition costs, (2) payments under existing
QF and power purchase contracts, and (3) unrecovered imple-
mentation costs. Excluding these exceptions, any transition
costs not recovered during the transition period will be
absorbed by PG&E, Nuclear decommissioning costs, which are
not considered transition costs, will be recovered through a
CPUC authorized charge. During the transition period, this
charge will be incorporated into the frozen rates. After the
transition period, customers will be assessed a surcharge until
the nuclear decommissioning costs are fully recovered.
PG&E's ability to recover its transition costs during the
transition period will be dependent on several factors. These
factors include: (1) the extent to which application of the cur-
rent regulatory framework established by the restructuring
legislation will continue to be applied, (2) the amount of transi-
tion costs approved by the CPUC, (3) the market value of its
generation plants, (4) future sales levels, (5) fuel and operating
costs, (6) the market price of electricity, and (7) the ratemak-
ing methodology adopted for Diablo Canyon. Considering its
current evaluation of these factors, PG&E believes it will recover
its transition costs and that its owned generation plants are
not impaired. However, a change in these factors could affect
the probability of recovery of transition costs and result in a
material loss.
PG&E has proposed to implement portions of its transition
cost recovery plan in 1997. The CPUC decision on PG&E's 1997
Energy Cost Adjustment Clause (ECAC) application would
decrease PG&E's 1997 revenue requirement by $720 million.
This decrease would be partially offset by a $160 million rev-
enue requirement increase, provided by the legislation, for
purposes of enhancing transmission and distribution system
safety and reliability. This increase was approved by the CPUC
as part of PG&E's transition cost recovery plan.
Given the electric customer rate freeze, the $560 million
net revenue requirement decrease resulting from the consoli-
dation of the ECAC decision and the revenue requirement
increase contemplated in the cost recovery plan would be
available for transition cost recovery. The proposed acceler-
ated recovery of Diablo Canyon would absorb an estimated
$400 million of this available revenue requirement. The remain-
ing revenue requirement would be available to recover other
transition costs.
Accounting for the Effects of Regulation: As a
result of applying the provisions of SFAS No. 71 (discussed in
Note I above), PG&E has accumulated approximately $1.6 bil-
lion of regulatory assets attributable to electric generation at
December 31, 1996. The net investments in Diablo Canyon
and the other generation assets were $4.5 and $2.7 billion,
respectively, at December 31, 1996. The net present value of
above-market QF power purchase obligations is estimated to
be $5.3 billion at January 1, 1998, at an assumed market price
of $0.025 per kilowatt-hour (kWh) beginning in 1997 and
escalating at 3.2 percent per year.
PG&E believes that the restructuring legislation establishes a
definitive transition to market-based pricing for electric gener-
ation. Incorporating the effects of the competitive auction pric-
ing of electricity and customer direct access, this transition
includes cost-of-service based ratemaking. In addition, PG&E's
generation-related transition costs will be collected through a
nonbypassable charge. Based on this structure, PG&E believes
it will continue to meet the requirements of SFAS No. 71
throughout the transition period.
At the conclusion of the transition period, PG&E believes it
will be at risk to recover its generation costs through market-
based revenues. At that time, PG&E expects to discontinue the
application of SFAS No. 71 for the electric generation portion
of its business. Since PG&E anticipates it will have recovered all
transition costs required to be recovered during the transition
period, including generation-related regulatory assets and
above-market investments in net plant, PG&E does not expect a
material adverse impact on its financial position or results of
operations from discontinuing the application at that time.
As a result of the CPUC's restructuring decision and
California's electric industry restructuring legislation, the
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) has begun inquiries
regarding the appropriateness of the continued application of
30SFAS No. 71 by California utilities to their electric generation
businesses. As discussed above, PG&E believes it currently
meets and will continue to meet the requirements to apply
SFAS No. 71 during the transition period. In the event that the
SEC concludes that the current regulatory and legal framework
in California no longer meets the requirements to apply SFAS
No. 71 to the generation business, the Company would reeval-
uate the financial impact of electric industry restructuring and
a material write-off could occur,
Given the current regulatory environment, PG&E's electric
transmission and distribution businesses are expected to
remain regulated and, as a result, will continue application of
the provisions of SFAS No. 71.
Note 3: Natural Gas Matters
The Gas Accord Settlement (Accord): In an effort
to promote competition and to give all residential and smaller
commercial (core) customers the same options that exist for
industrial and larger commercial (noncore) customers, PG&E
submitted the Accord to the CPUC in 1996. In addition to offer-
ing increased customer choice, the Accord would establish gas
transmission rates for the period July 1997 through December
2002 and resolve various pending regulatory issues. The
Accord must be approved by the CPUC before it can be imple-
mented. A CPUC decision is expected in 1997.
The major outstanding gas regulatory issues that the Accord
would resolve include the 1988 through 1995 gas reasonable-
ness proceedings, the initial capital costs for the PG&E Pipeline
Expansion, the interstate transition cost surcharge (ITCS)
recovery, and the PG&E pipeline transportation commitments,
all of which are discussed in further detail below.
As of December 31, 1996, PG&E has reserved approximately
$527 million, including $182 million reserved during 1996,
relating to its gas regulatory issues and gas capacity commit-
ments, the majority of which are addressed by the Accord. The
Company believes the ultimate resolution of these matters,
whether through approval of the Accord or otherwise, will not
have a material adverse impact on its financial position or
future results of operations.
Gas Reasonableness Proceedings: Recovery of gas
costs through PG&E's regulatory balancing account mechanisms
is subject to a CPUC determination that such costs were rea-
sonable. Under the current regulatory framework, annual
31
|
reasonableness proceedings are conducted by the CPUC on
a historic calendar year basis.
In 1994, the CPUC issued a decision which ordered a
disallowance of approximately $90 million of gas costs plus
accrued interest of approximately $25 million through 1993
for PG&E's Canadian gas procurement activities from 1988
through 1990. PG&E has filed a lawsuit in a federal district court
challenging the CPUC's decision on Canadian gas costs. PG&E
expects this issue to be resolved as part of the Accord dis-
cussed above. Under the Accord, PG&E would agree to forgo
recovery of the $90 million disallowance ordered in the 1988
through 1990 gas reasonableness proceeding, irrespective of
the outcome of the lawsuit.
A number of other reasonableness issues related to PG&E'S
gas procurement practices, transportation capacity commit-
ments, and supply operations for periods dating from 1988 to
1994 were resolved when the CPUC accepted a settlement in
December 1996 between PG&E and the Office of Ratepayer
Advocates (ORA) of the CPUC. Under the terms of that
settlement, PG&E will return $67 million plus interest to
ratepayers in 1997. PG&E has previously recorded reserves for
this settlement.
PGT/PG&E Pipeline Expansion: In November 1993,
the Company expanded its natural gas transmission system
providing additional firm transportation capacity from the
Canadian border to Northern and Southern California and
the Pacific Northwest.
PG&E has filed an application with the CPUC requesting
that capital costs of $810 million and ongoing operating costs
for the PG&E, or California, portion of the Pipeline Expansion
be found reasonable. Revenues are currently being collected
under interim rates approved by the CPUC, subject to
adjustment.
In 1996, a CPUC Administrative Law Judge (AL) ordered
consolidation of the market impact phase of the PG&E Pipeline
Expansion reasonableness proceeding and the ITCS proceeding
discussed below. An ALJ also ordered reopening of the 1993
PG&E Pipeline Expansion Rate Case to allow reconsideration
of issues regarding the decision to construct the PG&E Pipeline
Expansion. Were the CPUC to reverse its previous decision,
which found that PG&E was reasonable in constructing the PG&E
Pipeline Expansion, the ultimate outcome could have an
adverse impact on PG&E's ability to recover its cost for unusedcapacity on other pipelines as well as on its own intrastate
facilities. PG&E expects these issues to be resolved as part of
the Accord discussed above. Under the Accord, PG&E would
agree to set rates for the PG&E Pipeline Expansion based on
total capital costs of $736 million.
Transportation Commitments: PG&E has gas
transportation service agreements with various Canadian and
interstate pipeline companies. These agreements include
provisions for payment of fixed demand charges for reserving
firm capacity on the pipelines. The total demand charges that
PG&E will pay each year may change due to changes in tariff
rates. The total demand and transportation charges paid by
PG&E under these agreements (excluding agreements with PGT)
were approximately $212, $175, and $225 million in 1996,
1995, and 1994, respectively.
Pipeline
Company
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
The following table summarizes the approximate capacity
held by PG&E on various pipelines (excluding PGT) and the
related annual demand charges at December 31, 1996:
El Paso
Transwestern
NOVA
ANG
Firm
Capacity
Held
(MMcf/6)
1,140
200
600
600
PG&E Corporation
Total
Annual
Gross
Demand
Charges
(in millions)
$163
$ 29
$ 20
$ 13
|
Contract
Expiration
Dec. 1997
Mar. 2007
Oct. 2001
Oct. 2005
As a result of regulatory changes, PG&E no longer procures
gas for its noncore customers, resulting in a decrease in PG&E's
need for firm transportation capacity for its gas purchases.
PG&E continues to procure gas for almost all of its core
customers and those noncore customers who choose bundled
service (core subscription customers). To serve these cus-
tomers, PG&E holds approximately 600 million cubic feet per
day (MMcf/d) of firm capacity for its core and core subscription
customers on each of the pipelines owned by El Paso Natural
Gas Company (El Paso), NOVA Corporation of Alberta (NOVA),
Alberta Natural Gas Company Ltd (ANG), and PGT.
PG&E is continuing its efforts to broker or assign any
remaining unused capacity, including unused capacity held for
its core and core subscription customers. Due to relatively
low demand for Southwest pipeline capacity, PG&E cannot
predict the volume or price of the capacity on El Paso and
Transwestern Pipeline Company (Transwestern) that will be
brokered or assigned.
Substantially all demand charges incurred by PG&E for
pipeline capacity are eligible for rate recovery, subject to a
reasonableness review. These demand charges include capacity
that was formerly used to serve noncore customers but
which at present cannot be brokered or which is brokered
at a discount. However, certain groups, including the ORA
and intervenors, have challenged the recovery of these
unrecovered demand charges.
32
In December 1995, the CPUC issued a decision on the rea-
sonableness of PG&E's 1992 operations, concluding that it was
unreasonable for PG&E to commit to transportation capacity
with Transwestern. The decision orders that costs for the
capacity in subsequent years of the contract, which expires in
2007, be disallowed unless PG&E can demonstrate that the
benefits of the commitment outweigh the costs.
The recovery of demand charges associated with capacity
which was formerly used to serve PG&E's noncore customers
will be decided by the CPUC in the ITCS proceeding, unless oth-
erwise resolved as part of the Accord. Pending a final decision
in the ITCS proceeding, the CPUC has approved collection
(subject to refund) in rates of approximately 50 percent of
the demand charges for unbrokered or discounted El Paso
and PGT capacity which was formerly used to serve PG&E's
noncore customers.
Under the Accord, PG&E would not recover costs through
1997 associated with Transwestern capacity originally sub-
scribed to in order to serve core customers and would have
limited recovery during the period 1998 through 2002. Also as
part of the Accord, PG&E would forgo recovery of 100 percent
and 50 percent of the ITCS amounts allocated to its core and
noncore customers, respectively.
The Company believes ultimate resolution of its capacity
commitments and the ITCS proceeding, either through approval
of the Accord or otherwise, will not have a material adverse
impact on its financial position or future results of operations.
Note 4: Diablo Canyon
The Diablo Canyon rate case settlement as adopted in 1988
and modified in 1995 (Diablo Settlement) bases revenues pri-
marily on the amount of electricity generated by Diablo
Canyon. The Diablo Settlement provides that Diablo Canyon
costs and operations are not subject to CPUC reasonableness
reviews. Only certain Diablo Canyon costs may be recoveredthrough base revenues over the term of the Diablo Settlement,
including a full return on such costs. The revenues to recover
all Diablo Canyon costs are included in Diablo Canyon oper-
ating revenues reported below. Other than for these and
decommissioning costs, Diablo Canyon discontinued the appli-
cation of SFAS No. 71 in July 1988.
Under the pricing provisions of the existing Diablo
Settlement, the price for power produced by Diablo Canyon
for 1997 is 10.0 cents per kWh effective January 1. PG&E has
the right to reduce the price below the amount specified.
Under the existing settlement, at full operating power, each
Diablo Canyon unit would contribute approximately $2.6 mil-
lion in revenues per day in 1997. The prices per kWh of elec-
tricity generated by Diablo Canyon for 1996, 1995, and 1994
were 10.50, 11.00, and 1.89 cents per kWh, respectively.
Selected financial information for Diablo Canyon is shown
below:
Year ended December 31,
(in millions)
Operating revenues
Operating income before
income taxes
Net income
1996
$1,789
998
497 |
1995
$1,845
1,029
507.
1994
$1,870
956
461
In determining operating results of Diablo Canyon,
operating revenues and the majority of operating expenses
were specifically identified pursuant to the Diablo Settlement.
Administrative and general expenses, principally labor
costs, are allocated based on a study of labor costs. Interest
is charged to Diablo Canyon based on an allocation of
PG&E debt.
In conjunction with electric industry restructuring, PG&E filed
in March 1996 a proposal for pricing Diablo Canyon genera-
tion at market prices and completing recovery of the invest-
ment in Diablo Canyon by the end of 2001. If this proposal is
adopted, there would be a significant change to the manner in
which Diablo Canyon earns revenues.
Under its proposal, PG&E would replace the existing settle-
ment prices with: (1) a sunk cost revenue requirement to
recover fixed costs, including a return on these costs, and
(2) a performance-based ratemaking (PBR) mechanism to
recover the facility's variable costs and capital addition costs.
As proposed, the sunk cost revenue requirement would accel-
erate recovery of Diablo Canyon sunk costs from a twenty-
year period ending in 2016 to a five-year period beginning in
33
1997 and ending in 2001. The related return on common
equity associated with Diablo Canyon sunk costs would be
reduced to 90 percent of PG&E's long-term cost of debt. PG&E'S
authorized long-term cost of debt was 7.52 percent in 1996.
The reduced rate of return combined with a shorter recovery
period would result in an estimated $4 billion decrease in the
net present value of PG&E's future revenues from Diablo
Canyon operations. If the proposed cost recovery plan for
Diablo Canyon were adopted during 1996, Diablo Canyon's
1996 reported net income would have been reduced by $350
million ($0.85 per share).
Note 5: Preferred Stock and Company
Obligated Mandatorily Redeemable Preferred
Securities of Trust Holding Solely PG&E
Subordinated Debentures
(See the Statement of Consolidated Capitalization for addi-
tional information.)
Preferred Stock: PG&E's nonredeemable preferred stock
at December 31, 1996, has rights to annual dividends per share
ranging from $1.25 to $1.50.
PG&E's redeemable preferred stock without mandatory
redemption provisions is subject to redemption at PG&E's
option, in whole or in part, if PG&E pays the specified redemp-
tion price plus accumulated and unpaid dividends through the
redemption date. Annual dividends and redemption prices per
share at December 31, 1996, range from $1.09 to $1.86 and
from $25.75 to $27.25, respectively.
PG&E's redeemable preferred stock with mandatory
redemption provisions consists of the 6.30% and 6.57% series
at December 31, 1996. These series of preferred stock are
subject to mandatory redemption provisions entitling them to
sinking funds providing for the retirement of stock outstand-
ing. They may be redeemed at PG&E's option, beginning in 2004
and 2002, respectively, at par value plus accumulated and
unpaid dividends through the redemption date. The estimated
fair value of PG&E's preferred stock with mandatory redemp-
tion provisions at December 31, 1996, and 1995, was approxi-
mately $135 and $139 million, respectively, based on quoted
market prices.
In 1995, PG&E redeemed all of its series 7.84%, 8%, and 8.20%
redeemable preferred stock. In addition, PG&E repurchased par-
tial amounts of its series 67%, 7.04%, and 7.44% redeemablePG&E Corporation
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
preferred stock through a tender offer. The aggregate par value
of these redemptions and repurchases was $331 million.
Dividends on all preferred stock are cumulative. All shares
of preferred stock have voting rights and equal preference
in dividend and liquidation rights. Upon liquidation or dissolu-
tion of PG&E, holders of preferred stock would be entitled to
the par value of such shares plus all accumulated and unpaid
dividends, as specified for the class and series.
Company Obligated Mandatorily Redeemable
Preferred Securities of Trust Holding Solely
PG&E Subordinated Debentures: During 1995, PG&E
through its wholly-owned subsidiary, PG&E Capital I (Trust),
completed a public offering of 12 million shares of 7.90%
cumulative quarterly income preferred securities (QUIPS), with
an aggregate liquidation value of $300 million. Concurrent with
the issuance of the QUIPS, the Trust issued to PG&E 371,135
shares of common securities with an aggregate liquidation
value of approximately $9 million. The Trust in turn used the
net proceeds from the QUIPS offering and issuance of the
common securities to purchase subordinated debentures
issued by PG&E with a face value of approximately $309 million,
an interest rate of 7.90 percent, and a maturity date of 2025.
These subordinated debentures are the only assets of
the Trust. Proceeds to PG&E from the sale of the subordinated
debentures were used to redeem and repurchase higher-cost
preferred stock.
PG&E's guarantee of the QUIPS, considered together with
the other obligations of PG&E with respect to the QUIPS, consti-
tutes a full and unconditional guarantee by PG&E of the Trust's
obligations under the QUIPS issued by the Trust. The subordi-
nated debentures may be redeemed at PG&E's option beginning
in 2000 at par plus accrued interest through the redemption
date. The proceeds of any redemption will be used by the
Trust to redeem QUIPS in accordance with their terms.
Upon liquidation or dissolution of PG&E, holders of these
QUIPS would be entitled to the liquidation preference of $25
per share plus all accrued and unpaid dividends thereon to
the date of payment. The estimated fair value of PG&E'S QUIPS at
December 31, 1996, and 1995, was approximately $29 and
$311 million, respectively, based on quoted market prices.
Note 6: Long-term Debt
(See the Statement of Consolidated Capitalization for
additional information.)
Mortgage Bonds: PG&E had $5.4 and $5.7 billion of
mortgage bonds outstanding at December 31, 1996, and 1995,
respectively. Additional mortgage bonds may be issued, subject
to CPUC approval, up to a maximum total amount outstanding
of $10 billion. All real properties and substantially all personal
properties of PG&E are subject to the lien of the mortgage, and
PG&E is required to make semi-annual sinking fund
for
payments
the retirement of the bonds.
PG&E redeemed or repurchased $182 and $114 million of
mortgage bonds in 1996 and 1995, respectively, with interest
rates ranging from 5.375 to 12.75 percent.
Included in the total of outstanding mortgage bonds at
December 31, 1996, and 1995, are $705 and $768 million,
respectively, of mortgage bonds held in trust for the California
Pollution Control Financing Authority (CPCFA) with interest
rates ranging from 5.85 to 8.875 percent and maturity dates
from 2007 to 2023. In addition to these mortgage bonds,
PG&E holds long-term loan agreements with the CPCFA as
described below.
34
Pollution Control Loan Agreements: In 1996, PG&E
refinanced $925 million of variable interest rate pollution con-
trol loan agreements with variable interest rate pollution con-
trol loan agreements to extend certain maturities and achieve
cost savings. These loan agreements from the CPCFA totaled
$988 and $925 million, respectively, at December 31, 1996,
and 1995. Interest rates on the loans vary with average annual
interest rates for 1996 ranging from 3.24 to 3.54 percent.
These loans are subject to redemption by the holder under
certain circumstances. These loans are secured by irrevocable
letters of credit which mature as early as 1999.
Long-term Debt of PGT: In 1996, PGT borrowed $92
million of long-term debt to finance the acquisition of PGT
Queensland Gas Pipeline.
In 1995, PGT issued $470 million of long-term debt, the
proceeds of which were used to refinance $600 million of out-
standing PGT debt.Additionally, in 1995, PGT issued commercial paper classified
as long-term debt based upon the availability of committed
credit facilities expiring in 2000 and management's intent to
maintain such amounts in excess of one year. The commercial
paper outstanding was $108 and $109 million at December 31,
1996, and 1995, respectively.
Repayment Schedule: At December 31, 1996, the
Company's combined aggregate amounts of maturing
long-term debt and sinking fund requirements, for the years
1997 through 2001, are $210, $660, $270, $413, and $376
million, respectively.
Fair Value: The estimated fair value of the Company's total
long-term debt of $8.0 and $8.4 billion at December 31, 1996,
and 1995, respectively, was approximately $8.0 and $8.7 billion,
respectively. The estimated fair value of long-term debt was
determined based on quoted market prices, where available.
Where quoted market prices were not available, the estimated
fair value was determined using other valuation techniques
(e.g., the present value of future cash flows).
Note 7: Short-term Borrowings
Substantially all short-term borrowings consist of commercial
paper, having a maturity of one to ninety days. Commercial
paper outstanding and the associated weighted average
interest rate at December 31, 1996, and 1995, were $681 mil-
lion and 5.86 percent and were $796 million and 5.92 percent,
respectively. The carrying amount of short-term borrowings
approximates fair value.
PG&E maintains a $1 billion revolving credit facility which
expires in 2001; however, it may be extended annually for addi-
tional one-year periods upon mutual agreement between PG&E
and the banks. This credit facility primarily provides support
for PG&E's commercial paper issuance. At maturity, commercial
paper can be either reissued or replaced with borrowings from
this credit facility. There were no borrowings under this facility
in 1996 or 1995.
In January 1997, PG&E Corporation established a $500 million
revolving credit facility in order to provide for corporate
short-term liquidity needs and other purposes.
35
Note 8: Investments in Debt and
Equity Securities
All of PG&E's investments in debt and equity securities are
held in external trust funds and are reported at fair value.
These investments, which are included in Nuclear
Decommissioning Funds, cannot be released from the trust
funds until authorized by the CPUC.
The proceeds received during 1996 and 1995 from sales
were approximately $1.5 billion in each year. During 1996 and
1995, the gross realized gains on sales of securities held as
available-for-sale were $14 and $9 million, respectively, and
the gross realized losses on sales of securities held as available-
for-sale were $20 and $22 million, respectively. The cost of
debt and equity securities sold is determined by specific
identification,
The following table provides a summary of amortized cost
and fair value of these investments:
Year ended December 31,
(in thousands)
Amortized Cost:
U.S. government and agency issues
Equity securities
Municipal bonds and other
Gross unrealized holding gains
Gross unrealized holding losses
Fair value
1996
$374,931
281,532
32,952
198,875
(5,361)
$882,929
1995
$322,838
269,117
63,061
117,673
(2,860)
$769,829
Note 9: Employee Benefit Plans
Retirement Plan: The Company provides
noncontributory defined benefit pension plans covering sub-
stantially all employees. Pension benefits are based on an
employee's years of service and base salary. The Company's
policy is to fund each year not more than the maximum
amount deductible for federal income tax purposes and not
less than the minimum legal funding requirement.December 31.
(in thousands)
Actuarial present value of benefit
The following schedule reconciles the plans' funded status
to the pension liability recorded on the Consolidated Balance
Sheet:
obligations
Vested benefits
Nonvested benefits
Accumulated benefit obligation
Effect of projected future
compensation increases
Projected benefit obligation
Plan assets at market value
Plan assets in excess of projected
benefit obligation
Unrecognized prior service cost
Unrecognized net gain
Unrecognized net transition
obligation
Accrued pension liability
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Year ended December 31,
(in thousands)
Service cost for benefits
earned
Interest cost
Actual return (loss) on
plan assets
Net amortization and
deferral
Net pension Income
1996
$(3,496,136) $(3,464,782)
(177,782)
(182,503)
(3,663,918)
(3,647,285)
(529,045)
(4,192,963)
5,526,247
1996
PG&E Corporation
1,333,284
82,756
(1,559,281)
811,130
Plan assets consist primarily of common stocks and
fixed-income securities. Unrecognized prior service costs and
net gains are amortized on a straight-line basis over the
average remaining service period of active plan participants.
The transition obligation is being amortized over 17.5 years
from 1987.
1995
85,895
97,348
$ (57,346) $ (147,264)
Using the projected unit credit actuarial cost method, net
pension income consisted of the following components:
1995
(548,743)
(4,196,028)
4,935,267
739,239
90,496
(1,074,347)
968,126
$ (99,946) $ (82,814) $(109,132)
(301,631) (290,563) (272,932)
1994
(20,358)
(353,195)
(586,350)
412,547
$ 56,358 $ 8,399 $ 10,125
The following actuarial assumptions were used in
determining the plans' funded status and net pension income.
Year-end assumptions are used to compute funded status,
while prior year-end assumptions are used to compute net
pension income.
December 31,
Discount rate
Rate of future
compensation increases
Expected long-term rate
of return on plan assets
1996
36
7.5%
5%
9% i
1995
7.25%
5%
9%
1994
8%
5%
9%
Net pension income or cost is calculated using expected
return on plan assets. The difference between actual and
expected return on plan assets is included in net amortization
and deferral and is considered in the determination of future
net pension income or cost. In 1996 and 1995, actual return
on plan assets exceeded expected return. In 1994, the
plan experienced a negative investment return due to weak
performance in domestic equities and bonds.
In conformity with SFAS No. 71, regulatory adjustments have
been recorded in the income statement and balance sheet for
the difference between utility pension income or cost deter-
mined for accounting purposes and that for ratemaking, which
is based on a funding approach.
Postretirement Benefits Other Than Pensions:
The Company provides contributory defined benefit medical
plans for retired employees and their eligible dependents and
noncontributory defined benefit life insurance plans for retired
employees. Substantially all employees retiring at or after age
55 are eligible for these benefits. The medical benefits are pro-
vided through plans administered by an insurance carrier or a
health maintenance organization. Certain retirees are responsi-
ble for a portion of the cost based on past claims experience
of the Company's retirees.
The CPUỤC has authorized PG&E to recover these benefits
for 1993 and beyond. Recovery is based on the lesser of the
annual accounting costs or annual contributions on a tax-
deductible basis to appropriate trusts. The Company's policy
is to fund each year an amount consistent with the basis for
rate recovery.The following schedule reconciles the medical and life
insurance plans' funded status to the postretirement benefit
liability recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheet:
December 31,
(in thousands)
Accumulated postretirement benefit
obligation
Retirees
Other fully eligible participants
Other active plan participants
Total accumulated postretirement
benefit obligation
Plan assets at market value
Accumulated postretirement benefit
obligation in excess of plan assets
(422,482)
23,761
Unrecognized prior service cost
Unrecognized net gain
(104,167)
449,647
Unrecognized transition obligation
Accrued postretirement benefit liability $ (40,346) $ (53,241)
Year ended December 31.
(in thousands)
Service cost for
benefits earned
Interest cost
Actual return on
plan assets
Amortization of
unrecognized prior
service cost
Amortization of
Plan assets consist primarily of common stocks and
fixed-income securities. Unrecognized prior service costs are
amortized on a straight-line basis over the average remaining
years of service to full eligibility of active plan participants.
Unrecognized net gains are amortized on a straight-line basis
over the average remaining years of service of active plan par-
ticipants. The transition obligation is being amortized over
20 years from 1993.
Using the projected unit credit actuarial cost method,
net postretirement medical and life insurance cost consisted of
the following components:
transition obligation
Net amortization
and deferral
Net postretirement
benefit cost
1996
$ 21,954
65,629
(91,050)
1,602
1996
26,314
38,329
$(444,782) $(528,367)
(132,797) (123,615)
(343,864) (309,405)
(921,443) (961,387)
666,287 538,905
(255, 156)
21,946
(226,753)
419,617
1995
$ 17,004
64,776
(108,932)
1995
1,616
26,533
70,070
$ 62,778 $ 71,067
1994
$ 23,617
64,872
(1,232)
1,711
28,913
(29,804)
$ 88,077
37
The discount rate, rate of future compensation increases,
and expected long-term rate of return on plan assets used
in accounting for the postretirement benefit plans for 1996,
1995, and 1994 were the same as those used for the
pension plan.
The assumed health care cost trend rate for 1997 is
approximately 10.0 percent, grading down to an ultimate rate
in 2005 of approximately 6.0 percent. The effect of a one-per-
centage-point increase in the assumed health care cost trend
rate for each future year would increase the accumulated
postretirement benefit obligation at December 31, 1996, by
approximately $75 million and the 1996 aggregate service and
interest costs by approximately $8 million.
The decrease in net postretirement benefit cost in 1995
compared to 1994 was primarily due to a reduction in work-
force and an increase in discount rate.
Net postretirement benefit cost is calculated using expected
return on plan assets. The difference between actual and
expected return on plan assets is included in net amortization
and deferral and is considered in the determination of future
postretirement benefit cost. In 1996 and 1995, actual return
on plan assets exceeded expected return. In 1994, actual
return on plan assets was less than expected.
Workforce Reductions: The effects of workforce
reductions announced by PG&E in 1994 are reflected in the
pension and postretirement benefits funded status tables
above, and the costs are discussed in Note 10.
Long-term Incentive Program: PG&E Corporation
maintains a Long-term Incentive Program (Program) which
provides for grants of stock options to eligible participants
with or without associated stock appreciation rights and divi-
dend equivalents. The Program also grants performance-based
units to eligible participants. As of December 31, 1996, 24.5
million shares of common stock have been authorized for
award under the program. At December 31, 1996, stock
options on 3,461,733 shares, granted at option prices ranging
from $16.75 to $34.25, were outstanding, of which 1,655,450
were exercisable. In 1996, 877,900 options were granted at
an option price of $28.25, which was the market price per
share on the date of
grant.
Outstanding stock options expire ten years and one day
after the date of grant and become exercisable on a cumulativebasis at one-third each year commencing two years from the
date of grant. In 1996, 1995, and 1994, stock options on
72,960, 235,568, and 52,143 shares, respectively, were exer-
cised at option prices ranging from $16.75 to $33.13, $16.75
to $33.13, and $24.75 to $32.13, respectively.
Effective January 1, 1996, the Company adopted SFAS
No. 123,"Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation." 5FA$
No. 123 requires the Company to disclose stock option costs
based on the fair value of options granted. For the years
ended December 31, 1996, and 1995, the fair value of options
granted was not material to the Company's results of
operations or earnings per share.
Note 10: Workforce Reductions
In 1994, PG&E expensed the total cost of its planned 1994-1995
workforce reductions of $249 million and recorded a corre-
sponding liability for benefits to be funded or paid. This
amount consisted of $136 million for additional pension bene-
fits, $52 million for other postretirement benefits, and $61
million for estimated severance costs, PG&E did not seek rate
recovery for the cost of the 1994-1995 workforce reductions.
In 1995, PG&E canceled approximately 800 of the 3,000
planned 1994-1995 reductions in response to the severity of
the damage caused by the winter storms of 1995 and the iden-
tification of certain facilities that would benefit from a more
extensive and accelerated maintenance program. As a result,
the estimated severance costs accrued and expensed in 1994
were reduced by $18 million in 1995.
Year ended December 31.
(in thousands)
Current
Deferred
Tax credits-net
Note II: Income Taxes
The Company files a consolidated federal income tax return
that includes domestic subsidiaries in which its ownership is
80 percent or more. Income tax expense includes current and
deferred income taxes resulting from operations during the
year. Tax credits are amortized over the life of the related
property.
The significant components of income tax expense were:
Total income
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
tax expense
1996
1999 de 24
$ 704,984 $1,011,358
(132,250)
(17,740)
$ 554,994
PG&E Corporation
1995
(97,864)
(18,205)
$ 895,289
1994
$821,455
34,657
(19,345)
$836,767
The significant components of net deferred income tax
liabilities were:
December 31.
(in thousands)
Deferred income tax assets
Deferred income tax liabilities:
Regulatory balancing accounts
Plant in service
Income tax-related deferred
charges(¹)
Other
38
Total deferred income tax liabilities
Total net deferred income taxes
Classification of net deferred
income taxes:
Included in current liabilities
Included in deferred credits
Total net deferred income taxes
Year ended December 31,
(in thousands)
Federal statutory income tax rate
Increase (decrease) in income
tax rate resulting from:
State income tax
(net of federal benefit)
Effect of regulatory treatment
of depreciation differences
Tax credits-net
$1,308,395
Other--net
Effective tax rate
$ 294,494
3,623,544
454,359
1,034,497
$5,406,894
$4,098,499
1996
$ 157,064
3,941,435
$4,098,499
1996
"Represents the portion of the deferred income tax liability related to the
revenues required to recover future income taxes.
35.0%
The differences between income taxes and amounts
determined by applying the federal statutory rate to income
before income tax expense were:
3.7
42.4%
$1,203,981
$385,604
3,552,974
1995
4.8
$5,365,528
$4,161,547
$ 227,782
3.933,765
$4,161,547
1995
443,152
983,798
35.0%
5,9
3.2
(1.4)
(.8)
(.8) (2.1)
40.1%
1994
35.0%
8.3
3.7
(1.1)
(.5)
45.4%
Note 12: Commitments
Capital Projects: Capital expenditures for 1997 are
estimated to be $1,773 million for utility, $38 million for
Diablo Canyon, and $211 million for diversified operations.
At December 31, 1996, Enterprises had $67 million in firm
commitments to make capital contributions for its equity share
of generating facility projects. The contributions, payable upon
commercial operation of the projects, are estimated to be$52 million in 1997 (included in the expenditures above) and
$15 million in 1998.
Letters of Credit: PG&E utilizes approximately $247
million in standby letters of credit to secure future workers'
compensation liabilities.
Qualifying Facilities and Other Power-Purchase
Contracts: Under the Public Utility Regulatory Policies
Act of 1978, PG&E is required to purchase electric energy and
capacity provided by QFs which are cogenerators and small
power producers. The CPUC established a series of power-pur-
chase contracts with certain QFs and set the applicable terms,
conditions, and price options. Under these contracts, PG&E is
required to purchase electric energy and capacity; however,
payments are only required when energy is supplied or when
capacity commitments are met. The total cost of these pay-
ments is recoverable in rates. PG&E's contracts with QFs expire
on various dates from 1997 to 2028. Energy payments to QFS
are expected to decline in the years 1997 through 2000.
Capacity payments are expected to remain at current levels.
In 1996, 1995, and 1994, PG&E negotiated early termination
or suspension of certain QF contracts to be paid through 1999
at discounted costs of $25, $142, and $155 million for 1996,
1995, and 1994, respectively. These amounts are expected to
be recovered in rates and as such are reflected as deferred
charges on the accompanying balance sheet. At December 31,
1996, the total discounted future payments remaining under QF
early termination or suspension contracts is $68 million,
QF deliveries in the aggregate account for approximately 19
percent of PG&E's 1996 electric energy requirements, and no
single contract accounted for more than 5 percent of PG&E's
energy needs.
PG&E also has contracts with various irrigation districts and
water agencies to purchase hydroelectric power. Under these
contracts, PG&E must make specified semi-annual minimum pay-
ments whether or not any energy is supplied (subject to the
provider's retention of the FERC's authorization) and variable
payments for operation and maintenance costs incurred by the
providers. These contracts expire on various dates from 2004
to 2031. The total cost of these payments is recoverable in
rates. At December 31, 1996, the undiscounted future
minimum payments under these contracts are $34 million for
each of the years 1997 through 2001 and a total of $383
39
million for periods thereafter. Irrigation district and water
agency deliveries in the aggregate account for approximately
six percent of PG&E'S 1996 electric energy requirements, and
no single contract accounted for more than five percent of
PG&E's energy needs.
The amount of energy received and the total payments
made under QF and other power-purchase contracts were:
Year ended December 31,
(in millions)
Kilowatt-hours received
QF energy payments
QF capacity payments
Other power purchase
payments
1996
26,056
$1,136
$ 521
$ 52
1995
26,468
$1,140
$ 484
$ 50
1994
23,903
$1,196
$ 518
$ 49
Note 13: Contingencies
Nuclear Insurance: PG&E has insurance coverage for
property damage and business interruption losses as a mem-
ber of Nuclear Mutual Limited (NML) and Nuclear Electric
Insurance Limited (NEIL). Under these policies, if a nuclear gen-
erating facility of a member utility suffers a loss due to a pro-
longed accidental outage, PG&E may be subject to maximum
assessments of $29 million (property damage) and $8 million
(business interruption), in each case per policy period, in the
event losses exceed the resources of NML or NEIL.
PG&E has purchased primary insurance of $200 million for
public liability claims resulting from a nuclear incident. An addi-
tional $8.7 billion of coverage is provided by secondary finan-
cial protection which provides for loss sharing among utilities
owning nuclear generating facilities if a costly incident occurs.
If a nuclear incident results in claims in excess of $200 million,
PG&E may be assessed up to $159 million per incident, with
payments in each year limited to a maximum of $20 million
per incident.
Environmental Remediation: The Company may be
required to pay for environmental remediation at sites where
the Company has been or may be a potentially responsible
party under the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA) or the California
Hazardous Substance Account Act. These sites include former
manufactured gas plant sites and sites used by PG&E for the
storage or disposal of materials which may be determined to
present a significant threat to human health or the environ-
ment because of an actual or potential release of hazardousPG&E Corporation
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
substances. Under CERCLA, the Company's financial responsibili-
ties may include remediation of hazardous substances, even if
the Company did not deposit those substances on the site.
The Company records a liability when site assessments
indicate remediation is probable and a range of reasonably
likely cleanup costs can be estimated. The Company reviews its
sites and measures the liability quarterly, by assessing a range
of reasonably likely costs for each identified site using cur-
rently available information, including existing technology,
presently enacted laws and regulations, experience gained at
similar sites, and the probable level of involvement and financial
condition of other potentially responsible parties. These esti-
mates include costs for site investigations, remediation, opera-
tions and maintenance, monitoring, and site closure. Unless
there is a better estimate within this range of possible costs,
the Company records the lower end of this range (classified as
other noncurrent liabilities).
The cost of the hazardous substance remediation ultimately
undertaken by the Company is difficult to estimate. It is rea-
sonably possible that a change in the estimate will occur in
the near term due to uncertainty concerning the Company's
responsibility, the complexity of environmental laws and regu-
lations, and the selection of compliance alternatives. The
Company has an accrued liability at December 31, 1996, of
$170 million for hazardous waste remediation costs at
those sites where such costs are probable and quantifiable.
Environmental remediation at identified sites may be as much
as $400 million if, among other things, other potentially
responsible parties are not financially able to contribute to
these costs, or further investigation indicates that the extent
of contamination or necessary remediation is greater than
anticipated at sites for which the Company is responsible.
This
upper limit of the range of costs was estimated using
assumptions least favorable to the Company, based upon a
range of reasonably possible outcomes. Costs may be higher if
the Company is found to be responsible for cleanup costs at
additional sites or identifiable possible outcomes change.
The Company will seek recovery of prudently incurred
hazardous substance remediation costs through ratemaking
procedures approved by the CPUC. The Company has recorded
a regulatory asset at December 31, 1996, of $146 million
for recovery of these costs in future rates. Additionally,
the Company will seek recovery of costs from insurance
carriers and from other third parties. The Company believes
40
the ultimate outcome of these matters will not have a
material adverse impact on its financial position or results
of operations.
Helms Pumped Storage Plant (Helms): Helms is
a three-unit hydroelectric combined generating and pumped
storage plant with a net investment of $710 million at
December 31, 1996. The net investment is comprised of the
pumped storage facility (including regulatory assets of $51 mil-
lion), common plant, and dedicated transmission plant. As part
of the 1996 General Rate Case decision in December 1995,
the CPUC directed PG&E to perform a cost-effectiveness study
of Helms. In July 1996, PG&E submitted its study, which con-
cluded that the continued operation of Helms is cost effective.
As a result of the study, PG&E recommended that the CPUC take
no action and address Helms along with other generating
plants in the context of electric industry restructuring.
PG&E is currently unable to predict whether there will be a
change in rate recovery resulting from the study. As with its
other hydroelectric generating plants, the Company expects to
seek recovery of its net investment in Helms through PBR and
transition cost recovery. The Company believes that the ulti-
mate outcome of this matter will not have a material adverse
impact on its financial position or results of operations.
Helms became commercially operable in 1984, following
delays due to a water conduit rupture in 1982 and various
start-up problems related to the plant's generators. As a result
of the rupture damage and the operational delay, PG&E incurred
additional costs which were excluded from rate base and last
revenues during the period the plant was under repair. In 1994,
PG&E submitted for CPUC approval a settlement with the ORA
regarding recovery of such additional costs and lost revenues,
amounting to approximately $98 million. In September 1996,
the CPUC issued a final decision adopting the settlement which
permits PG&E to recover that amount. Because PG&E's current
rate recovery already reflects the anticipated settlement,
adoption of the settlement will have no impact on rates.Legal Matters:
Cities Franchise Fees Litigation: In 1994, the City of Santa
Cruz filed a class action suit in a state superior court (Court)
against PG&E on behalf of itself and 106 other cities in PG&E's
service area. The complaint alleges that PG&E has underpaid
electric franchise fees to the cities by calculating those fees at
different rates from other cities not included in the complaint.
In September 1995, the Court certified the class of 107
cities in this suit and approved the City of Santa Cruz as the
class representative. In January and March 1996, the Court
made two rulings against certain cities effectively eliminating a
major portion of the suit. The Court's rulings do not resolve
the suit completely. The cities appealed both rulings. The trial
has been postponed pending the cities' appeal.
Should the cities prevail on the issue of franchise fee
calculation methodology, PG&E's annual systemwide city electric
franchise fees could increase by approximately $14 million and
damages for alleged underpayments for the years 1987 to 1996
could be as much as $145 million (exclusive of interest). If the
Court's January and March 1996 rulings become final, PG&E's
annual systemwide city electric franchise fees for the remaining
class member cities not subject to the Court's rulings could
increase by approximately $4 million and damages for alleged
underpayments for the years 1987 to 1996 could be as much
as $39 million (exclusive of interest).
The Company believes that the ultimate outcome of this
matter will not have a material adverse impact on its financial
position or results of operations.
Hinkley: In 1996, PG&E settled a 1993 lawsuit seeking dam-
ages for personal injuries allegedly suffered as a result of expo-
sure to chromium near PG&E's gas compressor station at
Hinkley. This lawsuit was settled for the aggregate sum of $333
million, of which $50 million had been paid in 1994, with the
remaining $283 million paid in 1996. PG&E had previously
reserved $200 million for this litigation and in 1996 recorded
an additional reserve of $133 million for this settlement. The
settlement does not resolve other pending chromium litiga-
tion, described below.
41
Chromium Litigation: In 1994 through 1996, several civil
suits were filed against PG&E on behalf of more than 1,500 indi-
viduals. The complaints seek an unspecified amount of com-
pensatory and punitive damages for alleged personal injuries
resulting from exposure to chromium in the vicinity of PG&E's
gas compressor stations at Hinkley, Kettleman, and Topock.
PG&E is responding to the complaints and asserting affirma-
tive defenses. PG&E will pursue appropriate legal defenses,
including statute of limitations or exclusivity of workers' com-
pensation laws, and factual defenses including lack of exposure
to chromium and the inability of chromium to cause certain
of the illnesses alleged.
Given the uncertainty, the Company cannot predict the
outcome of this litigation. However, the Company believes that
the ultimate outcome of this matter will not have a material
adverse impact on its financial position or results of
operations.
|Quarterly Financial Data: Due to the seasonal nature
of the utility business and the scheduled refueling outages
for Diablo Canyon, operating revenues, operating income, and
net income are not generated evenly every quarter during
the year.
Quarter ended
All four quarters of 1996 reflected a decline in price per
kilowatt-hours as provided in the modified pricing provisions
of the Diablo Canyon rate case settlement, and revenue reduc-
tions authorized by the 1996 General Rate Case (GRC) and
other related rate proceedings. In addition, maintenance and
operating expenses exceeded levels authorized by the GRC.
In the second quarter of 1996, the Company charged to
earnings $133 million for the settlement of a litigation claim,
Revenues were also reduced due to a greater number of
scheduled refueling days and unscheduled outages.
In the third quarter of 1996, the Company took charges
Quarterly Consolidated Financial Data (Unaudited)
(in thousands, except per share amounts)
1996
Operating revenues
Operating income
Net income
Earnings per common share
Dividends declared per common share
Common stock price per share
High
Low
PG&E Corporation
1995
Operating revenues
Operating income
Net income
Earnings per common share
Dividends declared per common share
Common stock price per share
High
Low
against earnings of $182 million for contingencies related
to gas transportation commitments.
In the fourth quarter of 1996, the Company charged
to earnings $59 million in write-downs of nonregulated
investments.
The Company recorded additional litigation reserves of $50
million in the first and third quarters of 1995. Diablo Canyon
scheduled refueling days and unscheduled outages reduced
earnings per common share in the fourth quarter of 1995.
The Company's common stock is traded on the New York,
Pacific, and Swiss stock exchanges. There were approximately
198,000 common shareholders of record at December 31,
1996. Dividends are paid on a quarterly basis, and net
cash flows are sufficient to maintain the current payment
of dividends.
December 31
$2,700,686
508,970
149,030
42
.34
.30
24.25
20.88
$2,227,224
45 1,674
227,085
.48
.49
30.63
27.13
September 30
$2,521,852
524,846
233,695
.55
.49
23.88
19.50
$2,637,653
781,912
377,593
.85
.49
30.00
28.38
June 30
$2,138,666
288,375
111,780
.25
.49
23.75
21.50
$2,448,641
820,370
405,520
.92
.49
29.75
24.75
March 31
$2,248,768
573,394
260,704
.61
.49
28.38
22.38
$2,308,247
709,029
328,687
.73
.49
25.75
24.25PG&E Corporation
Report of Independent Public Accountants
To the Shareholders and the Board of Directors of PG&E Corporation:
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheet and the statement of consolidated capitalization of PG&E
Corporation (a California corporation) and subsidiaries as of December 31, 1996, and 1995, and the related statements of consoli-
dated income, cash flows, common stock equity, preferred stock and preferred securities, and the schedule of consolidated seg-
ment information for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 1996. These financial statements and schedule of
consolidated segment information are the responsibility of the Company's management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion
on these financial statements and schedules based on our audits.
We conducted our audits in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and
perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement. An
audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. An audit also
includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall
financial statement presentation. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements and schedule of consolidated segment information referred to above
present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of PG&E Corporation and subsidiaries as of December 31, 1996, and
1995, and the results of their operations and cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 1996, in
conformity with generally accepted accounting principles.
ARTHUR ANDERSEN LLP
San Francisco, California
February 10, 1997
43
|PG&E Corporation
Responsibility for Consolidated Financial Statements
The responsibility for the integrity of the consolidated financial statements and related financial information included in this
report rests with management. The consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles appropriate in the circumstances and are based on the Company's best estimates and judgments after giving
consideration to materiality.
The Company maintains systems of internal controls supported by formal policies and procedures which are communicated
throughout the Company. These controls are adequate to provide reasonable assurance that assets are safeguarded from material
loss or unauthorized use and to produce the records necessary for the preparation of consolidated financial statements. There are
limits inherent in all systems of internal controls, based on the recognition that the costs of such systems should not exceed the
benefits to be derived. The Company believes its systems provide this appropriate balance. In addition, the Company's internal
auditors perform audits and evaluate the adequacy of and the adherence to these controls, policies, and procedures.
Arthur Andersen LLP, the Company's independent public accountants, considered the Company's systems of internal accounting
controls and conducted other tests as they deemed necessary to support their opinion on the consolidated financial statements.
Their auditors' report contains an independent informed judgment as to the fairness, in all material respects, of the Company's
reported results of operations and financial position.
The financial data contained in this report have been reviewed by the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors. The Audit
Committee is composed of six outside directors who meet regularly with management, the corporate internal auditors, and
Arthur Andersen LLP, jointly and separately, to review internal accounting controls and auditing and financial reporting matters.
The Company maintains high standards in selecting, training, and developing personnel to ensure that management's objectives
of maintaining strong and effective internal controls and maintaining unbiased and uniform reporting standards are attained. The
Company believes its policies and procedures provide reasonable assurance that operations are conducted in conformity with
applicable laws and with its commitment to a high standard of business conduct.
44
1Boards of Directors of
PG&E Corporation and
Pacific Gas and
Electric Company*
Richard A. Clarke
Chairman of the Board, Retired,
Pacific Gas and Electric Company
Harry M. Conger
Chairman of the Board,
Homestake Mining Company
David A. Coulter
Chairman and Chief Executive
Officer,
BankAmerica Corporation and
Bank of America NT&SA
C. Lee Cox
Vice Chairman,
AirTouch Communications
and President and Chief Executive
Officer, Retired,
Air Touch Cellular
William S. Davila
President Emeritus,
The Vons Companies, Inc.
(retail grocery)
Robert D. Glynn, Jr.
President and
Chief Operating Officer,
PG&E Corporation and
Pacific Gas and Electric Company
David M. Lawrence, MD
Chairman and
Chief Executive Officer,
Kaiser Foundation Health Plan, Inc.
and Kaiser Foundation Hospitals
Richard B. Madden
Chairman of the Board and Chief
Executive Officer, Retired,
Potlatch Corporation
(diversified forest products)
Mary S. Metz
Dean, University Extension,
University of California, Berkeley
Rebecca Q. Morgan
President and
Directors
Chief Executive Officer,
Joint Venture:
Silicon Valley Network
(nonprofit collaborative addressing
critical issues facing Silicon Valley)
Samuel T. Reeves
President,
Pinnacle Trading, LLC
(international investing)
Carl E. Reichardt
Chairman of the Board and Chief
Executive Officer, Retired,
Wells Fargo & Company and
Wells Fargo Bank, N.A.
John C. Sawhill
President and
Chief Executive Officer,
The Nature Conservancy
(international environmental
organization)
Alan Seelenfreund
Chairman of the Board and Chief
Executive Officer,
McKesson Corporation
(distributor of pharmaceuticals and
health care products)
Stanley T. Skinner
Chairman of the Board and
Chief Executive Officer,
PG&E Corporation and
Pacific Gas and Electric Company
Barry Lawson Williams
President
Williams Pacific Ventures, Inc.
(venture capital and real estate,
consulting, and mediation)
Permanent
Committees of the
Boards of Directors
of PG&E Corporation
and Pacific Gas and
Electric Company*
Executive Committees
Within limits, may exercise
powers and perform duties
of the Board.
Stanley T. Skinner (Chair)
Harry M. Conger
Robert D. Glynn, Jr.
Richard B. Madden
Mary S. Metz
Carl E. Reichardt
Audit Committees
Review financial statements and
internal accounting and control
procedures with independent
public accountants.
Harry M. Conger (Chair)
C. Lee Cox
William S. Davila
Mary S. Metz
Rebecca Q. Morgan
Barry Lawson Williams
Capital Investment
Committee**
Advises on long-term capital invest-
ment strategies and recommends
specific investment and divestment
opportunities.
Carl E. Reichardt (Chair)
Richard B. Madden
Samuel T. Reeves
John C. Sawhill
Barry Lawson Williams
*The composition of the Boards of Directors, Executive Committees, Audit Committees, Finance Committees, Nominating and
Compensation Committees, and Public Policy Committees is the same for PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company.
**A committee of the PG&E Corporation Board of Directors only.
45
Finance Committees
Recommend long-range financial
policies and objectives, and actions
required to achieve those
objectives.
Richard B. Madden (Chair)
Richard A. Clarke
David A. Coulter
Carl E. Reichardt
Stanley T. Skinner
Barry Lawson Williams
Nominating and
Compensation
Committees
Recommend candidates for nomina-
tion as directors, recommend com-
pensation and employee benefit
policies and practices, and review
planning for executive development
and succession.
Carl E. Reichardt (Chair)
David M, Lawrence, MD
Samuel T. Reeves
John C. Sawhill
Alan Seelenfreund
Public Policy Committees
Review public policy issues which
could significantly affect customers,
shareholders, employees, or the
communities served, and recom-
mend plans and programs to
address such issues.
Mary S. Metz (Chair)
Richard A. Clarke
William S. Davila
Robert D. Glynn, Jr.
John C. SawhillOfficers of
PG&E Corporation
Stanley T. Skinner
Chairman of the Board and
Chief Executive Officer
Robert D. Glynn, Jr.
President and
Chief Operating Officer
Gordon R. Smith
Chief Financial Officer
Bruce R. Worthington
General Counsel
Leslie H. Everett
Corporate Secretary
Kent M. Harvey
Treasurer
Christopher P. Johns
Controller
Linda Y. H. Cheng
Assistant Corporate Secretary
Eric Montizambert
Assistant Corporate Secretary
Kathleen Rueger
Assistant Corporate Secretary
Gabriel B. Togneri
Assistant Treasurer
Officers of
Pacific Gas and
Electric Company
Stanley T. Skinner
Chairman of the Board and
Chief Executive Officer
Robert D. Glynn, Jr.
President and
Chief Operating Officer
James D. Shiffer
Executive Vice President
Robert J. Haywood
Senior Vice President and
General Manager,
Customer Energy Services
Thomas W. High
Senior Vice President,
Corporate Services
Jack F. Jenkins-Stark
Senior Vice President and
General Manager,
Gas Supply Business Unit
Gregory M. Rueger
Senior Vice President and
General Manager,
Nuclear Power Generation
Business Unit
Gordon R. Smith
Senior Vice President and
Chief Financial Officer
Bruce R. Worthington
Senior Vice President and
General Counsel
Shan Bhattacharya
Vice President,
Technical and
Construction Services
Lee Callaway
Vice President,
Corporate Communications
Barbara Coull Williams
Vice President,
Division Operations
John C. Danielsen
Vice President,
Computer and
Telecommunications Services
Richard A. Draeger
Vice President,
Electric Service Reliability
Leslie H. Everett
Vice President and
Corporate Secretary
Katheryn M. Fong
Vice President,
Customer Services
Roger J. Gray
Vice President,
General Services
Anthony Harris
Vice President,
Business Customer Service
Officers
46
Robert L. Harris
Vice President,
Community Relations
Kent M. Harvey
Vice President and Treasurer
Christopher P. Johns
Vice President and Controller
Steven L. Kline
Vice President,
Regulation
Thomas C. Long
Vice President,
Customer Information Systems
E. James Macias
Vice President and
General Manager,
Electric Transmission Business Unit
William R. Mazotti
Vice President,
Gas Services and Operations
Jackalyne Pfannenstiel
Vice President,
Corporate Planning
Robert P. Powers
Vice President,
Diablo Canyon Operations and
Plant Manager
James K. Randolph
Vice President and
General Manager,
Power Generation Business Unit
Daniel D. Richard, Jr.
Vice President,
Governmental Relations
G. Brent Stanley
Vice President,
Human Resources
Lawrence F. Womack
Vice President,
Nuclear Technical Services
Linda Y. H. Cheng
Senior Assistant
Corporate Secretary
Eric Montizambert
Assistant Corporate Secretary
Kathleen Rueger
Assistant Corporate Secretary
Gabriel B. Togneri
Assistant Treasurer
Senior Officers of
Principal PG&E
Enterprises
Subsidiaries and
Related Ventures
Tony F. DiStefano
Chairman, President, and Chief
Executive Officer of
PG&E Enterprises
Joseph P. Kearney
President and
Chief Executive Officer of
U.S. Generating Company
Junona A. Jonas
President and
Chief Operating Officer of
Vantus Energy Corporation
Robert Frommer
President of
PG&E Properties, Inc.
Senior Officers of
Principal Pacific Gas
Transmission (PGT)
Company Subsidiaries
and Related Ventures
Jack F. Jenkins-Stark
Chairman of the Board of PGT
Stephen P. Reynolds
President and
Chief Executive Officer of PGT
David Tudor
President and
Chief Executive Officer of
Energy Source, Inc.
Michael J. McDanold
Managing Director of
PGT Australia PTY LimitedShareholder Services Office
77 Beale Street, Room 2600
San Francisco, CA 94105-1814
Call Toll Free 1-800/367-7731
Fax 415/973-7831
For financial and other information about PG&E Corporation
or Pacific Gas and Electric Company, please visit our site on the
World Wide Web at: www.pge.com
Manager of Shareholder Services
David M. Kelly
Mail Code B26B
P.O. Box 770000
San Francisco, CA 94177-0001
1-800/367-773||
If you have questions about your account or need copies of
PG&E Corporation's or Pacific Gas and Electric Company's publica-
tions, please write or call the Shareholder Services Office at:
PG&E Corporation
Corporate Secretary
Leslie H. Everett
Mail Code B32
P.O. Box 770000
San Francisco, CA 94177-0001
415/973-2880
Shareholder information
If you have general questions about PG&E Corporation or Pacific
Gas and Electric Company, please write or call the Corporate
Secretary's Office:
Manager of Investor Relations
Angela M. Comstock
Mail Code B8C
P.O. Box 770000
San Francisco, CA 94177-0001
415/973-3007
Securities analysts, portfolio managers, or other representatives
of the investment community should write or call the Investor
Relations Office:
PG&E Corporation
Pacific Gas and Electric Company
General Information
415/973-7000
47
Stock Held in Brokerage Accounts
("Street Name")
When you purchase your stock and it is held for you by your
broker, the shares are listed with us in the broker's name, or
"street name." We do not know the identity of the individual
shareholders who hold their shares in this manner-we simply
know that a broker holds a number of shares which may be held
for any number of investors. If you hold your stock in a street
name account, you receive all dividend payments, tax forms,
publications, and proxy materials through your broker. If you are
receiving unwanted duplicate mailings, you should contact your
broker to eliminate the duplications.
PG&E Corporation Dividend Reinvestment Plan
If you hold PG&E Corporation or Pacific Gas and Electric Company
stock in your own name, rather than through a broker, you may
automatically reinvest dividend payments from common and/or
preferred stock in shares of PG&E Corporation common
stock through the Dividend Reinvestment Plan (the "Plan"). You
may obtain a Plan prospectus and enroll by contacting the
Shareholder Services Office. If your certificates are held by a
broker (in "street name"), you are not eligible to participate
in the Plan.
Direct Deposit of Dividends
If you hold stock in your own name, rather than through a broker,
you may have your common and/or preferred dividends trans-
mitted to your bank electronically. You may obtain a direct deposit
authorization form by contacting the Shareholder Services Office.
Replacement of Dividend Checks
If you hold stock in your own name and do not receive your dividend
check within five business days after the payment date, or if a
check is lost or destroyed, you should notify the Shareholder Services
Office so that payment may be stopped on the check and a
replacement mailed.
Lost or Stolen Stock Certificates
If you hold stock in your own name and your stock certificate has
been lost, stolen, or in some way destroyed, you should notify
the Shareholder Services Office immediately.
|PG&E Corporation
Pacific Gas and Electric Company
Annual Meetings of Shareholders
Date: April 16, 1997
Time: 10:00 a.m.
Location: Masonic Auditorium
III California Street
San Francisco, California
A joint notice of the annual meetings, joint proxy statement, and
proxy form are being mailed with this annual report on or about
March 3, 1997, to all shareholders of record as of February 18,
1997.
10-K Report
If you would like a copy of the 1996 Form 10-K Report to the
Securities and Exchange Commission, please contact the
Shareholder Services Office, or visit our site on the World Wide
Web at: www.pge.com
1997 Dividend Payment Dates
PG&E Corporation
Common Stock
January 15
April 15
July 15
October 15
Pacific Gas and
Electric Company
Preferred Stock
February 15
May 15
August 15
November 15
48
Stock Exchange Listings
PG&E Corporation's common stock is traded on the New York,
Pacific, and Swiss stock exchanges. The official New York Stock
Exchange symbol is "PCG" but PG&E Corporation common
stock is listed in daily newspapers under "PG&E" or "PGE."
Local newspaper symbols may vary.
Pacific Gas and Electric Company has 13 issues of preferred
stock and one preferred security, all of which are listed on the
American and Pacific stock exchanges.
Issue
First Preferred, Cumulative,
Par Value $25 Per Share
Redeemable:
7.44%
7.04%
6.875%
6.57%
6.30%
5.00%
5.00% Series A
4.80%
4.50%
4.36%
Non-Redeemable:
6.00%
5.50%
5.00%
Cumulative
Quarterly Income
Preferred Securities:
7.90% Series A
*Local newspaper symbols may vary
Newspaper
Symbol"
PacGE pfQ
PacGE pfU
PacGE pfX
PacGE pfY
PacGE pfZ
PacGE pfD
PacGE pfE
PacGE pfG
PacGE pfH
PacGE pfl
PacGE pfA
PacGE pfB
PacGE pfC
PG&E Cap A quips
I
T
1
:Design Martin Design Associates
Photography: Portrait: Dong Mañone
Hustration: Grelbach/Marcucci
This report la printed on niicycled paper
10 February 1993, PG&E Corporation,
reserved.PG&E CORPORATION
77 Beale Street
P.O, Box 770000
San Francisco, CA 94177
www.pge.com