-31-94
95 05 6335
1994 ANNUAL REPORT TO SHAREHOLDERS
Reliable and Affordable Electricity
Hled BaxTRONACA
Real-Time
Pricing
68-68JR
MAK 10 1995
W
Clean, Natural Gas
Gas
Brokering
TÍAG. - 6 Bp.
BGE: Still Your Best Choice
LIN
New Products and Services
BGE
ARIS
B
GE has supplied energy to customers in.
Central Maryland for nearly 180 years.
While the utility industry is changing
rapidly, our customers know that one thing doesn't
change: our reputation for quality people, products,
and services.
In 1994, we strengthened our commitment to giving
our customers the best value for their energy dollar,
while working to keep our costs as low as possible.
That's why we're the best energy choice they
can make.
We have also strengthened our commitment to
continuously improving our performance as an
investment. Strong, profitable, stable, we've been
paying uninterrupted dividends for 84 years.
That's why we're still one of the best investment
choices you can make.
The cover of this year's annual report illustrates
our dedication to our core utility businesses: afford-
able electricity and natural gas. We intend to keep
doing what we already do well-even as we begin
exciting and profitable enterprises in gas brokering,
real-time pricing, new energy technologies, home
products and services, and diversified businesses.
Yesterday, today, and tomorrow. BGE: Still your
best choice.Corporate Profile
Baltimore Gas and
Electric Company
I
• Combines a core utility
business (electric and gas)
with diversified, nonutility
operations
• Serves 2,300 square miles
in Central Maryland with
electricity, and 617 square
miles with natural gas
. Holds assets of over
$8 billion in utility and
i nonutility operations
I
• Earned combined revenues
of $2.8 billion in 1994
from utility and diversified
operations
• Employs 8,100 full-time
workers as Maryland's ninth
largest employer
T
• Is the nation's oldest gas
company and one of the
earliest electric utilities
BGE serves
▪ More than 2.6 million
Maryland residents
▪ More than I million
electric customers
• More than 535,000
gas customers
West Virginia
Pennsylvania
Virginia
BG BGF Service Territory
In millions, except per-share aBNOUIS
Common Stock Data
Earnings per share
Utility operations
Diversified activities
Total
Dividends declared per share
Average shares outstanding
Return on average common equity
Book value per share-year-end
Market price per share-year-end
Financial Data
Revenues
Electric
Gas
Diversified activities
Total
Net income
Earnings applicable to common stock
Assets
Utility
Diversified
Total
Utility construction expenditures
BGE investment in Constellation
Companies
Utility System Data
Electric system sales-megawatt-hours
Gas sales-dekatherms
Delaware
Highlights
$2.0
$1.50
STORE
1.500
1994
()
$ 1.81
0.12
$ 1.93
$ 1.51
147,1
10.63%
$18.42
$ 22%
$2,127
421
235
$2,783
$ 324
$ 284
$6,9
1,158
Earnings and Dividends Declared
per Share of Common Stock
$8,144
$ 449
.
$ 319
27.5
108.7
1990 1991 1992 1993 1991
● 29 Fathings it onsolidated
49 Thvakuja Declated
1993
$ 1.77
0.08
$ £85
$ 1.47
145.1
10.39%
$17.94
$ 25%
$2,112
433
196
$2,741
$ 310
$ 268
$6,820
1,167
$7,987
$ 455
$ 307
26.8
108.0
3,30
$2.5
$15
SRI
35
Change
0
2.3 %
50.0 %
4.3 %
2.7 %
1.4 %
2.3 %
2.7 %
(12.8) %
Common Stock arket Price
and Book Value
0.7 %
(2.8) %
19.9 %
1.5 %
4.5 %
6.0 %
2,4 %
(0.8) %
2.0 %
(1.3) %
3.9 %
2.5 %
0.6 %
1990 1991 1992 1993 1994
na am Market Price Cear Land Close
■ Honk Vale(Year End)
Contents
1. We're Committed to Remaining
Your Best Investment Choice
What does the future hold for the utility
industry? How will BGE respond? In his
annual letter to shareholders, Chairmun
of the Board and Chief Executive Officer
Christian H. Poindexter discusses why
BGE is still a smart investment choice.
5. We're Earning Our Customers'
Confidence Every Day
Building tighter bonds with our customers is
key, says President and Chief Operating
Officer Edward A. Crooke. His letter looks at
BGE's performance in 1994, with an eye on
our goals for 1995—and beyond.
8. BGE at a Glance
Here's a snapshot of BGE and its subsidiaries,
including our products and markets, our key
1994 results, significam developments in our
industries, and a look at what's ahead.
10. BGE: Still Your Best Choice
Drawing on nearly 180 years of experience,
we're committed to excellence in everything
we do: serving our customers, staying cost-
conscious, providing energy products and
services to fit our customers' needs, making
the most of our diversified businesses, and
investing in the quality of life in our
community.
20. Glossary of Terms
21. Financial Contents
58. BGE Boards of Directors and Officers
63. Shareholder Information
✪ This annual report is printed on recycled paper,
which was made from the 500 tons of waste paperChairman's Letter to Shareholders
We're Committed to Remaining
YOUR BEST INVESTMENT
In 1994, BGE made solid progress in a rapidly changing energy industry. We took
aggressive steps to improve our cost structure. We're revitalizing virtually every part of
our business to support our mission: achieving complete customer satisfaction by
providing superior energy products and services. And we successfully countered our
competition's every move by giving our customers a better value for their energy dollars.
Still, the true test of our abilities will come in the next few years as federal and state
regulatory changes reshape our industry. That's the crux of my message to share with
you my thoughts on what lies before us, how we will respond, and why BGE remains
your best investment choice.
W
Then I look back over the past few
years, I'm delighted by how far
we've come, and how fast. In a
letter that follows this one, Ed Crooke,
BGE's President and Chief Operating Officer,
describes our 1994 accomplishments at greater
length. Let me give you a few highlights.
• Common-stock earnings increased by
$16 million, or 6 percent, over 1993, as a
result of record cold weather last winter,
offset by unseasonably mild temperatures
in late summer and fall.
• BGE increased its annual dividend last
spring 3 percent, to $1.52 per share, the first
utility to do so after two other large utilities
cut dividends deeply.
• Our people and systems performed excep-
tionally well throughout an incredibly harsh
winter that shattered demand records for
both gas and electricity.
Choice
• We added more than 9,500 new gas
customers and 160 miles of new gas mains,
exceeding 1993's growth by over 50 percent.
• We made excellent strides in improving
our cost structure by reducing operating
and maintenance costs 6 percent below
'93 levels.
• We downsized our labor force about
13 percent through special retirement,
severance, and career-assistance programs,
reaching our lowest employment level
since 1975.
• And earnings from our Constellation
subsidiaries increased 16 percent over 1993.
Last year was not without its disappointments,
though. Fear of the unknown-namely, how the
electric industry will handle competition-
combined with rising interest rates to cause our
stock price to decline by nearly 13 percent. This
was not too bad, however, compared to the Dow
Jones Utility Average, which dropped almost
21 percent.
New Regulations Transform Gas Business
The regulatory changes we're experiencing on
the electric side of our business are similar to
those we've experienced in the natural gas
Christian H. Poindexter
BGE Stock Fares
Better Than Market
BGE
Utility
Average
Rising interest rates
and uncertainty over
industry competition
combined to cause the
value of electric stocks
to decline in 1994.
BGE's stock fared rela-
tively well, however,
decreasing just under
13 percent. That was
much better than the
Dow Jones Utility
Average, which fell by
almost 21 percent.
1.industry over the past decade. The efforts of
the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
(FERC) to stimulate competition in the gas
industry culminated in Order 636, which
unbundled gas-service elements. Now gas users
have an array of purchasing, transportation,
brokering, and storage options from which to
choose. These options are intended to minimize
gas costs while maintaining the reliability of
gas sources.
Before Order 636, we bought gas primarily
from the pipelines. Now BGE and other local
distribution companies buy gas directly from
several suppliers and arrange separately for
transportation and storage. BGE's large gas
customers are arranging for their own supplies,
too, and are contracting with us for transporta-
tion to their facilities. Although the Maryland
Public Service Commission (PSC) is still inves-
tigating options for reforming the state's gas
regulation, BGE is now beginning to take
advantage of new growth opportunities made
available by deregulation, such as the gas-
brokering market.
Electric Regulatory Changes Ahead
Over the past two years, FERC has been
carrying out the basic tenets of the Energy
Policy Act of 1992. Its top priority is to
promote efficiency by ensuring a competitive
bulk power market through equal access to
utility transmission systems. Last November,
FERC also began examining the role of power
pooling and electric utility restructuring in an
era of increased competition.
State regulators are moving just as quickly to
redefine the electric energy market. Last
September, Maryland's PSC announced it
would hold hearings in 1995 to consider
electric utility restructuring, the impact of
competition, and regulatory reform. In its issue
paper called "New Directions in Energy
Regulations," the PSC defined possible
scenarios ranging from limited to full competi-
tion. BGE filed its response with the PSC on
2.
wauan
January 17. The PSC plans to issue a general
policy statement in June of 1995 on changes
recommended for Maryland's electric industry.
BGE Responds to PSC Inquiry
I welcome the PSC's examination into electric
utility regulation as an important step toward
reducing the uncertainty in the financial
markets. As we told the PSC in our response,
we believe there are only two practical
alternatives for the course that regulation
should take in Maryland.
Under the first alternative, which I believe
embodies the spirit of the Energy Policy Act,
the market for electric generation is opened up.
This will allow utilities and independent power
producers to offer their generating capacity to
local utilities, and utility customers to continue
to buy energy from their local utility. This
choice would require little regulatory reform.
"To be competitive, you
have to think like a
competitor," says Project
Manager Pete Buote, right,
who oversees the construc-
tion of a small-scale, flexible
plant BGE is building at our
Perryman site to meet peak
demand. "We've kept the
organization small, the
accountability clear, and
given the builder incentives
to reduce costs," says Buote,
shown with Project Controls
Administrator Ron Ballance.
It's a strategy that's paying
off BGE expects to realize
multi-million-dollar
savings by the time the
140-megawatt combustion
turbine unit comes on line
in 1995.The second alternative is to allow retail compe-
tition, under which all customers could choose
their generation suppliers. Generation would be
fully competitive without rate regulation; trans-
mission and distribution would continue to be
regulated. This option would require a dramatic
change in the way we're regulated currently.
Unfortunately, we can't wait for FERC and the
PSC to define the future before we start
preparing for it. To make sure we're ready for
any eventuality, we're planning along two
separate paths.
The first path extends decisions we made in
early 1994. It assumes that keeping our genera-
tion and distribution businesses within a single
company is still our best option. We'd continue
operating as a combination gas and electric
utility while looking to increase revenues from
nontraditional sources. The second planning path
will prepare us to separate into individual busi-
nesses if regulators decide unbundling electric
services is in the best interests of consumers.
Our current transmission system and pooling
arrangement probably will change no matter
what scenario the PSC chooses, although it
will continue to be federally regulated. A
team of BGE employees is at work with the
following objectives: develop a structure that
doesn't harm reliability, maintain a fair rate of
return on our investment, and ensure that the
interests of BGE's customers and shareholders
are represented.
Distribution Remains Key Strategic Asset
Regardless of which path we ultimately take,
we're likely to maintain the franchise status of
the electric and gas distribution systems, which
give us direct links to our customers. Our goal,
therefore, is to increase the energy products
and services we offer as a gas and electric
distribution business.
Creating competitively priced products and
services is the work of our newly formed
Marketing & Sales Division. To improve our
BGE Gas Prices
Well Below Average
(Cents per Therm!
lud
Poston
New York
Philadelphia
Newark
Wilmington
Washingtrin. TEGI
Norfolk
50
74
80
Gas business expan-
sion is a key element
of BGE's revenue-
growth strategy. Our
efforts are helped by
the fact that our
residential gas price
is about 20 percent
lower than the
average gas price
in major East
Coast cities.
90
quality of service, we created dedicated teams of
employees to serve the needs of specific
customer groups-for example, large industrials,
hospitals, schools, and government agencies.
We're developing a marketing strategy that first
identifies customers with the most revenue
potential. Next, we will establish quantifiable
marketing and sales plans that include complete
portfolios of products, services, and price offer-
ings for various customer segments. And we're
strengthening our team by filling certain critical
marketing positions with people who have
successful track records in competitive industries.
Expansion of our gas business is a key element
of our marketing strategy as well. We now
serve about 30 percent of our electric service
territory with gas, leaving room for significant
growth. Our residential gas prices average
about 20 percent less than those of nearby local
distribution companies, giving us a strong
advantage. And customers are requesting gas
for both home and business use because it's
clean, affordable, and dependable. Our ultimate
goal is to reposition ourselves as a full-service
energy company that is the provider of choice.
Controlling Costs Is Very Important
No matter what FERC and the PSC ultimately
decide, we have already seen the beginnings of
price competition in the electric market. That's
why we will continue to reduce our operating,
maintenance, and capital expenditures and
have set aggressive targets to reduce total
generation costs.
Investment rating agencies are also giving far
more weight to generation costs when judging
utilities financial health. They believe utilities
with low-cost generation will maintain or even
improve their credit ratings because they're
better able to keep old customers and attract
new ones. The agencies are also paying close
attention to the percentage of revenues a utility
receives from industrial sales, reasoning that
those revenues are most vulnerable to competi-
tion. So the lower the percentage, the better.
3.On both counts, BGE looks good. Our average
industrial rate is more than 20 percent below
the regional average. And BGE's reliance on
industrial sales is among the lowest in the Mid-
Atlantic region. In fact, industrial customers
provided only 10 percent of BGE's total elec-
tric system revenues in 1994. Two other factors
also improve our competitive position: We
have no municipal utilities or other large
wholesale customers within our service terri-
tory, and we don't have to incur heavy capital
expenses to meet Clean Air Act requirements.
Diversified Businesses Build Customer Value
Our diversified businesses will continue to
provide profit opportunities, but with one
important difference. In 1994, we adopted
a synergistic approach to total customer
service. The combined talents of BGE and
Constellation Holdings developed a proposal
that includes a 10-year contract with the Johns
Hopkins Hospital and University, one of our
largest customers. The proposal, which will be
finalized in early 1995, addresses some of
Hopkins' key energy and real estate needs in
return for a long-term commitment. The
Hopkins' proposal includes a long-term energy
supply contract, building construction, and
energy systems management.
Besides working closely with BGE to
support the utility's existing customers, the
Constellation Companies will continue to
pursue their individual objectives. Constellation
Energy is taking action to further enhance the
profitability of its 24 wholesale power projects,
while exploring growth opportunities in North
and South America. Constellation Real Estate
Group will continue to reduce real estate assets
by selling fully mature projects at reasonable
values. The company also plans to add 15 or
more assisted-living facilities for seniors.
Our newly formed BGE Home Products &
Services subsidiary will also enhance our
ability to be a full-service energy company,
Although we've been in the appliance and
4.
We plan to
remain the
yield-oriented
equity
investment we
have always
been. All our
long-term
financial
targets and
competitive
strategies
support
this goal."
home electronics sales and service businesses
for decades, we've now broadened our scope
to increase revenues and strengthen customer
ties. In December, BGE purchased Maryland
Environmental Systems, Inc. (MESI), a
company specializing in the installation and
service of commercial and residential heating,
air conditioning, and plumbing. MESI's owner
and president, William H. Munn, was named
President and Chief Executive Officer of
BGE Home Products & Services effective
January 1, 1995.
We'll Remain a Yleld-Oriented Investment
By voting last May to increase our dividend,
BGE's Board of Directors showed its confi-
dence in BGE's financial strength, flexibility,
and competitive position. But we also wanted
to send a clear message to our investors: We
plan to remain the yield-oriented equity invest-
ment we have always been. All our long-term
financial targets and competitive strategies
support this goal.
Now more than ever, success is in our own
hands. We will continue to respond to our new
business environment in ways that enable us to
produce higher earnings that will support divi-
dend growth. This no doubt influenced your
initial decision to invest in BGE, and I hope it
will continue to do so. We're committed to
providing even higher levels of customer
satisfaction and service reliability. And as we
reach that goal, you, our investors, will share
in the rewards.
I thank you for your continued confidence
in BGE.
CAPoindeyter
Christian H. Poindexter
Chairman of the Board and
Chief Executive Officer
February 10, 1995Edward A. Crooke
BGE Generation
Costs Decrease
Faster Than Region's
(Cents per Kilowatt-Hour)
4.5
4.0
3.5
We're Earning Our
CUSTOMERS' CONFIDENCE
3.0
1991 1992 1993 1994
Е ВСЕ
PJM Average
* Regional statistics unavailable
President's Letter to Shareholders
Over the past three
years, BGE has taken
aggressive steps to
reduce total genera-
tion costs to prepare
for competition, steps
that have caused those
costs to decrease
much faster than
PJM average.
Every Day
In years past, we measured our success with statistics on the nuts and bolts of running a
utility. Kilowatt-hours and dekatherms sold. Degree-days and system upgrades. Plants
under construction and rate cases under review.
In 1995, these traditional measures of operating performance are not sufficient. What
counts even more today is our ability to earn our customers' confidence—day in, day out.
In a competitive market, combination companies have an inherent advantage. We can
offer our customers one-stop shopping for energy products and services, an important
distinction at a time when customers are discovering they have options.
e must be adamant about identi-
fying and delivering services that
meet our customers' needs. That
means meeting several criteria that directly and
indirectly benefit our customers and strengthen
our relationship with them.
Our Financial and
Competitive Position Improved
In 1994, our strategies drew votes of confi-
dence from the financial community. Several
investment agencies improved BGE's credit
outlook, citing the strength of our financial
performance and aggressive cost cutting. We
reduced operating and maintenance costs by
$45 million and held the line on construction
expenditures. In 1995, we plan to reduce
construction expenditures by $100 million,
or 22 percent.
Since generation the area of our business
most at risk to competition, we are focusing on
enhancing the price competitiveness of our elec-
tric generating plants. This will require us to get
more kilowatt-hour output from less resource
input in the power production process. Last
year our fossil plants decreased their average
unit cost of power generation by over
10 percent. And we are creating a more
flexible and efficient fossil work force by cross-
training plant personnel to perform a full range
of operations and maintenance work.
In 1994, we reduced nuclear generation costs
by 14 percent over 1993. In the year ahead, we
will strive to shorten our nuclear outages and to
reduce operating costs, as well as explore the
benefits of renewing the operating licenses of
Calvert Cliffs' two nuclear units due to expire
in 2014 and 2016.
Although cost awareness is now a part of our
daily operations, we are guarding against
overzealous cost cutting. We will not sacrifice
our long-term ability to deliver superior
customer service by focusing strictly on short-
term savings. Going forward, we will
emphasize reducing costs primarily through
productivity gains.
5.We Sharpened Our Customer Focus
Because customer service is a top priority, we
must move beyond simply supplying gas and
electricity. Last year, we countered every
competitive proposal by offering a superior
package of products and services. We joined a
partnership to build a district chilled-water
system that will supply air conditioning to
groups of office buildings. And we offered our
customers a full range of services for their
energy facilities from construction to operation
and maintenance contracts.
We also greatly advanced our efforts to bring
natural gas within reach of many more
customers. We created a separate gas division
made up of three departments to manage every
facet of gas expansion operations, planning,
as well as engineering and construction. We are
targeting considerable capital for main exten-
sions to areas forecasting high growth. Along
those mains, we will maximize opportunities
for conversions to gas heat.
As Chris mentioned in his letter, late last year
the PSC approved our entry into the gas-
brokering business. Until now, BGE only
offered transportation services to its delivery
service customers from their gas suppliers.
With gas brokering, those customers now have
the option of purchasing brokered gas from
BGE. Brokering also gives us the opportunity
to earn a profit on our ability to provide the
lowest price gas service. The key to success in
this business will be our ability to put together
economical packages that best meet our
customers' needs and buying preferences.
Last Winter Redefined Customer Service
Last winter forever changed our understanding
of customer service. From Christmas '93 to
early March of '94, BGE battled its way through
six ice and snow storms. One of the most
memorable began on January 15, when an arctic
cold front sent temperatures plummeting below
zero with a windchill of minus 40 degrees. The
record-breaking cold froze everything it came in
6.
▲ During the winter of '93-'94, a seemingly endless succession of intense
storms hit the Baltimore area. Beginning on Christmas and ending in early
March, the extreme cold broke long-standing demand records for both elec-
tricity and gas. During that time, BGE employees saw just about everything:
frozen coal piles; trees shattering under the weight of ice; a baby born in an
automobile; rain, sleet, snow, ice, and lightning in the same storm; and
record numbers of almost everything, from broken mains to service calls.
Throughout it all, BGE employees persevered. "I was cold, tired, and wet,
but the effort was worth it," says Overhead Mechanic Kenny Younger. "Our
crews work storm duty well. Each time, we just kept going until we got the
power back on.
39contact with-fuel, lubricants, and fuel lines.
Our problems were compounded by icy roads,
rail lines, and waterways that greatly slowed oil
and coal shipments to our power plants.
On January 18, the PJM (Pennsylvania-New
Jersey-Maryland) Interconnection, a power
pool of eight Mid-Atlantic electric companies,
hit a new all-time winter electric peak of
41,350 megawatts. While the PJM system's
capacity is 55,000 megawatts, only 40,000
megawatts were available during the peak hour
because of several planned and unplanned
outages. At 8 a.m, the following morning, BGE
set an all-time electric peak demand 17 percent
higher than our previous winter record.
The PJM companies had no choice but to
begin emergency measures. Load management
programs were activitated across the entire
system. Customers were asked to reduce
energy consumption, and controlled rotating
outages were initiated throughout the PJM to
protect the integrity of the system. BGE's share
of the outages was activated for about four
hours out of a six-hour period. They averaged
between 5 and 10 minutes each and affected
15,000 to 45,000 customers at a clip.
On the gas side of our business, it was a record-
setting week as well. On January 19, we
surpassed a 12-year demand record for natural
gas by 10 percent. During that week, new daily
sendout records were set, our peak-shaving
plant established new production records, while
our propane air plant achieved a remarkable
91 percent rated capacity five out of seven days
that week.
Thanks to the tireless dedication of BGE's
employees, both our electric and gas systems
withstood the winter strain. the wake of
some of the worst weather our region has ever
experienced, our employees demonstrated the
attributes that set them apart: absolute compe-
tency under fire, unwavering dedication to
duty, and a remarkable capacity for helping
▲ In 1994, BGE won
the coveted Eagle
Award for superior
customer service from
the American Gas
Association and
Edison Electric
Institute. Two days
after an arctic cold
wave set new demand
records last January,
BGE created a Severe
Weather Payment
Option that gave
customers the ability
to spread payment of
their January bills
over several months
without additional
charges. About
114,000 customers
took advantage of this
payment option.
others. Even more impressive, our employees
worked through these crises with no significant
personal injuries or motor vehicle accidents
while on the job.
Investing Today For Better Service Tomorrow
The storms reaffirmed what we've always
known: To our customers, there's no substitute
for reliable service. And although competition
will initially focus on price, what will deter-
mine long-term success will be our ability to
deliver the right combination of price and
service. We have developed an aggressive
program to improve our distribution system,
mainly through a strong focus on preventive
maintenance-improvements designed to
reduce by half the number of sustained
customer outages over the next four years. On
the transmission side of our business, last year
we improved system stability and access to
power outside our service territory by
completing the last leg of the 500-kilovolt
transmission loop around Washington, D.C.
We Have an Enduring Tradition
I said in my introduction to this letter that we
see success as the ability to maintain customer
confidence. We have a unique advantage
meeting that goal because we have an enduring
tradition of quality people, products, and
services. This tradition has never been more
strongly tested or performed so well as in 1994.
I want to thank our employees for their extraor-
dinary efforts over the past year.
You'll learn more about our accomplishments
and plans for the future in the pages
that follow.
EA Carbe
Edward A. Crooke
President and Chief Operating Officer
February 10, 1995
7.Electric
Gas
Winoasit
Constellation Holdings
BGE Home Products
& Services
BGE at a Glance
Products and Markets
• Owns and operates 10 generating plants, including
two units at Calvert Cliffs Nuclear Power Plant
(CCNPP); is part owner of Keystone, Conemaugh,
and Safe Harbor generating plants in Pennsylvania;
manages electric assets of $6 billion
• Provides electricity and related services to
over 1 million customers in 2,300-square-mile
service territory in Central Maryland
·
• Belongs to PJM (Pennsylvania-New Jersey-
Maryland) Interconnection, a power pool of eight
Mid-Atlantic companies that provides reliability
and the opportunity for bulk power sales
• Provides residential storage and distribution as
well as commercial delivery through two gas plants
and 10 gate stations in and around Baltimore
• Serves nearly 550,000 customers in
617-square-mile service territory
• Acts as gas broker for large industrial and
commercial customers, which requires locating,
buying, and transmitting gas
• Constellation Holdings, Inc. (CHI) consists of three
businesses contributing to BGE profits and objectives
. Constellation Energy, Inc. (CEI) develops, owns,
and operates 24 wholesale power projects in the U.S.,
and holds operations and maintenance contracts in
14 other plants
. Constellation Real Estate Group, Inc. (CREG)
develops, owns, and operates commercial properties
. Constellation Investments, Inc. (CII) provides
current income from investments in securities,
partnerships, and financial services companies
• Provides revenue growth opportunities in markets
relating to core gas and electric businesses
• Markets home appliances, electronics, replacement
windows and doors, kitchen remodeling, installation
of commercial and residential heating and air-
conditioning systems, and plumbing services
.
• Operates 11 retail stores throughout service territory
• Provides repair service and offers service contracts
for appliances, electronics, and heating and cooling
equipment
Key 1994 Results
• Decreased fossil generation costs by 10 percent and
nuclear generation costs by 14 percent below 1993
Signed BGE's largest customer, Bethlehem Steel, to a
10-year contract
.
Signed agreement with PECO Energy Company to
purchase 140 megawatts (MW) of electricity for 25 years
• Increased system stability and access to power from
outside our service territory by completing last leg of
500-kV transmission loop around Washington, D.C.
.
• On January 19, set all-time hourly peak demand record
of 6,077 MW of electricity-a 17 percent increase over
the previous winter high
• Launched aggressive expansion plan to increase gas sales
• Secured PSC approval to offer gas-brokering service to
large gas customers
• Installed 161 miles of gas main, an 80 percent increase
over 1993 growth
S
• Added 9,500 new gas customers, a 50 percent increase
over 1993 growth
• On January 19, set all-time record for daily sendout of
natural gas at 762,000 dekatherms-a 10 percent increase
over the previous high
• CHI partnered with BGE in a proposal to provide Johns
Hopkins Hospital and University with research facility
and central energy services, including construction and
ongoing building and energy services management; the
proposal will be finalized in early 1995
• CEI's wholesale power projects had a solid operating
year, particularly the company's coal- and
wood-fueled plants
• CREG sold, at a profit, two shopping centers and one
office building; increased occupancy rate on all developed
properties to 94 percent
• Created new subsidiary, BGE Home Products &
Services, Inc. (HPS) in July 1994
• Defeated legislative challenge to BGE's right to expand
into nonregulated markets
• Acquired Maryland Environmental Systems, Inc., a
company specializing in installation and service of
commercial and residential heating, air conditioning,
and plumbingSales of Electricity
(Billions of Kilowatt-Hours)
15
12
9
6
3-
0.
1990 1991 1992 1993 1994
Residential
Commercial
Industrial
Sales of Gas
(Millions of Dekatherms)
50
40-
30-
20-
10-
0
1990 1991 1992 1993 1994
Residential
Commercial
Industrial
Baltimore Area
Commercial Office Occupancy
(% Leased)
100%
90%
80%-
70%
60%
50%
40%
1991 1992 1993 1994
Constellation Real Estate Group
Baltimore Metropolitan Average
Home Products & Services
Sales Mix
Appliance and Electronics Sales
Appliance Service
Kitchen Remodeling
In the Industry
• The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
(FERC) opened inquiry on issues relating to power
pooling and utility restructuring
California's Public Utility Commission proposes
open access for all electric customers by 2002
• Maryland Public Service Commission (PSC)
begins process of examining regulatory reform
for Maryland utilities; a general policy order is
expected in mid-1995
·
BQE's electric system sales of 27.5 billion kWh
were a 2.5 percent increase over 1993
• FERC recommends more open access to gas
distribution systems, creates electronic bulletin board
system for supply and pricing transfer
•
Gas Industry Standards Board created to govern
transactions in deregulated marketplace
▪ East Coast Natural Gas Co-op formed to enhance
regional service and supply reliability
• PSC releases draft recommendations for further
unbundling of gas services in Maryland
◄ BGE's overall gas sales Increased 1 percent in 1994,
Including a 4 percent Increase in sales to Industrial
customers
• The expansion of wholesale power business
increases opportunities for utilities to use energy
expertise through nonregulated power subsidiaries
• International energy markets provide growth
opportunity for U.S. utilities
Demand for senior-living facilities accelerates
as significant portion of population approaches
retirement age
• Economic trends point to upswing in real estate
market
◄ CREG commercial office properties reached
94 percent occupancy In 1994, outperforming area
average for commercial occupancy rates by 9 percent
• General upswing in retail growth continues
• Growth in consumer sales is due to new product
introductions and increased emphasis on larger
stores with broader product selections
◄ In 1994, 66 percent of HPS sales were in major
appliances and electronics sales, 31 percent in appli
ance service, and 3 percent in kitchen remodeling
What's Ahead
• Reduce generation costs and improve system
efficiency to reposition BGB as one of the lowest
priced PJM companies by 1998
• Prepare for possibility of retail competition
by developing a plan to unbundle generation,
transmission, and distribution capabilities
• Expand real-time pricing and off-site
meter-reading pilot programs
• Evaluate benefits of renewing operating licenses
of CCNPP's two nuclear units that will expire in
2014 and 2016
·
• Expand gas distribution system to areas of high
residential growth
• Route gas mains to increase conversions from
other fuels
• Seek opportunities to expand territory
Expand gas-brokering business
Further unbundling of gas services expected
in late 1995
·
▪ CHI will continue to partner with utility to retain
existing customers and attract new ones to BGE's
service territory
• CREG will continue to reduce existing real estate
assets, expand service business, and invest in select,
profitable new projects
▪ CEI will continue to develop, own, and operate
energy supply projects in the U.S., while exploring
growth opportunities in North and South America
* Constellation will further expand in the senior
living area with emphasis on the development,
ownership, and operation of assisted-living facilities
in the Mid-Atlantic region
• Position HPS to increase market share
• Locate new retail stores in areas forecasting high
residential growth
Capture a significant share of the untapped market
for heat pump and air-conditioning service contracts
9.BGE: Still Your Best Choice
CUSTOMER SERVICE
Is a Top Priority
"Ten years ago, customer service was reacting to what customers
said they needed," says Tom Brady, BGE's Vice President of
Customer Service & Distribution. "Today, we've taken steps to
stay ahead in a competitive market so we can provide service
improvements before customers have to ask.”
"n 1994, we reorganized the areas of our
I
business that directly serve our customers
to meet their needs better. We consolidated
our customer service and distribution areas and
reorganized our Marketing & Sales Division. We
divided our customers into categories according
to the market segments they belonged to--for
example, hospitals, schools, county governments,
and large industrial users. Then we assigned
account representatives to each segment. By
focusing on customer segments, we're personal-
izing our service and getting to know our
customers' businesses as well.
10.
Because
Maximizing Our Employes Advantage
In 1994, BGE customer surveys confirmed
what we already knew-our employees are one
of our greatest resources. We want to develop
that resource even more to strengthen our
customer service efforts. We have improved
training and qualifications for account represen-
tatives, linked compensation to performance,
and empowered employees to take immediate
actions to satisfy customers. In addition,
BGE executives meet regularly with our top
industrial customers to gain a better under-
standing of their business and service needs.
Service Customers
Can Rely On
After price, service relia-
bility is our customers'
highest priority. One way
we have responded to this need is by
investigating every opportunity to enhance
the reliability of our electric systems, including
developing new technologies.
In 1994, BGE created Silicon Power Networks
General Partnership, a partnership that is
developing a new switch that will virtually
eliminate the time it takes a large company's
backup electric system to restart after a power
interruption. This switch is being field tested
this year.
The reliability of our electric distribution
system is also a priority. In 1994, a team of
employees was asked to identify distribution
problems and develop a long-term, cost-
effective plan to improve system reliability,
The Genesis team, as it is called, has recom-
mended a number of improvements that are
expected to reduce sustained customer outages
by nearly 50 percent over the next four years.
ABGE's off-site meter-
reading project calls
for a phased-in installa-
tion of 200,000 radio-
equipped gas and
electric meters to
collect data without
entering customers'
homes or businesses.
"To the customer, this
means a more accurate
bill. To BGE, it means
better efficiency," says
Meter Reading Trainer
Marilyn Gordon, shown
here with Meter Installer
Andy Tippett. "Last year,
we replaced 85,000
meters with only one
billing problem. We're
proud of that record,"
Tippett says.
......Reliability is key for large industrial customers. A momentary power drop can halt
critical processes and incur huge costs. In a partnership with Silicon Power Corp.
(SPCO), BGE is developing and testing a prototype device to address the problem.
"The solid-state switch safely allows commercial customers to switch to backup
power sources instantaneously," says Walt Mendenhall, BGE's Chief Electrical
Designer on the project, center, with SPCO's Harshad Mehta, CEO and President,
left, and John Schwartzenberg, SPCO's chief engineer.
The switch is a good example of how improving customer service can also lead to
new revenue sources. Several large industrial customers, as well as other utilities,
have already expressed interest in the switch.
Providing superior customer service is the job of the more than 8,100 BGE and
subsidiary employees. Efforts to improve our customer service include moving our
employees closer to the front lines of service by improving training and empowering
workers to take actions to meet customer needs on the spot.
11.12.
▲ Improving the way we work was an important part of BGE's efforts to reduce
costs in 1994. A good example was Calvert Cliffs' saltwater pipe replacement
project, a critical component of 1994's Unit One refueling outage. The project,
which brought together employees of BGE's Mobile Maintenance Force and
Calvert Cliffs Nuclear Power Plant, was a tremendous success.
"Through thorough pre-planning, outstanding teamwork, and a commitment to
safety, the project team replaced a crucial piping system ahead of schedule and
well under budget, saving millions of dollars," says Senior Engineer Ken Boone.
Some project team members shown from left front, are Todd Cuba and
Terry Hatch. Standing are Wayne Bodnar, Ken Boone, Chris Davenport, and
Mike Telmanowski.BGE: Still Your Best Choice
COST AWARENESS
Is Keeping Us Competitively Priced
"In a competitive environment, customers want the best value for
their money, and that creates an obligation for businesses to be
aware of their costs," says Chuck Shivery, BGE's Chief Financial
Officer. "This is not a new idea for BGE. The changing market has
prompted us to continuously find more effective ways to work."
ast year's annual report outlined our
actions to reduce costs by using
resources more effectively. That
meant studying every function in the company
to eliminate those not contributing to BGE's
mission: to achieve complete customer
satisfaction by providing superior energy
products and services.
Because
Those initiatives have produced tangible
results. In 1994, we reduced our operating and
maintenance expenses more than $45 million
from 1993, a 6 percent decrease. We've also
projected a $100 million-or 22 percent-
decrease in construction expenditures in 1995,
and have concentrated our capital spending on
transmission and distribution system upgrades.
Moreover, we set aggressive cost-reduction
targets to position BGE among the lowest
priced regional utilities in generating costs.
We're Generating at Lower Costs
Competitive success means owning or having
access to the lowest cost sources of energy.
One strategy to achieve low-cost generation is
to avoid building new plants. We're investi-
gating ways to meet projected increases
in electric demand without new construction.
We're making greater
use of purchased power
contracts to meet long-
term demand, and we're
taking steps to get
maximum value from
our existing plants. In particular, we're looking
into the feasibility of renewing the operating
licenses of the Calvert Cliffs Nuclear Power
Plant units due to expire in 2014 and 2016.
Exploring New Opportunities for Efficiency
Cost awareness is leading us to explore new
systems and technologies that help us remain
competitively priced.
An example is our Business Information
System, which will incorporate the latest
computer technology to support our financial,
planning and budgeting, cost control, and
procurement processes. When complete in
1996, the Business Information System will
provide BGE with timely, more detailed data
about the costs and profitability of our products
and services. And that will help us make
better-informed decisions.
▲ As BGE explored how
to operate more competi-
tively, our Printing
Services Unit set out to
prove
it could beat any
outside printer's prices.
"In a highly competitive
bidding process, we won
the contract against some
of the biggest and best
printing firms in the
region," says Supervisor
Dan Kovalsky, left, shown
with Printing Production
Coordinator Glen
Talmadge, center, and
Printing Estimator/
Coordinator Kevin
Matthews. "Even our
competitors acknowledge
our shop's quality work
and high efficiency,"
says Kovalsky.
13.BGE: Still Your Best Choice
Because We're Bringing Customers
PRODUCTS AND SERVICES
They Need and Want
"We've redefined ourselves to get in front of the competitive
market," says Steve Wood, BGE's Vice President of Marketing &
Sales. "We're not looking to be one thing to all customers. We're
working to be a total energy company."
B
GE's Marketing and Sales Division is
helping transform BGE from a steady
supplier of a few energy forms to a
company capable of meeting any energy need
with diverse products and services.
Last year, we brought in a marketing consulting
firm to help us develop a true customer-driven
marketing approach. With the firm's assistance,
we reorganized our marketing and sales func-
tions and created a new marketing plan. The
result is a streamlined organization that is leading
BGE's transition to a total energy company.
Offering Flexible Packages of
Products and Services
A key part of our marketing approach is to offer
flexible products and services. We've grouped
all our products and services into packages or
energy options that can be customized to meet
the needs of large and small customers.
14.
Our Energy Supply Options consist of our core
products of full-service electric and gas. This
package also expands our energy options with
less traditional offerings, such as on-site genera-
tion and a new district chilled-water cooling
option. Our district chilled-water partnership will
offer businesses an energy-efficient cooling
system supplied from a central plant operated
by BGE.
Our Lifestyle and
Process Options
consist of energy
choices, such as heat-
pump servicing, appli-
ance sales, and fuel-conversion programs.
Project and Maintenance Options include
project design and construction for residential
and commercial customers, as well as appli-
ance service and sales. And our Payment and
Financing Options consist of flexible financing
alternatives, such as budget billing, energy-
project financing, and financing installation of
energy-efficient lighting systems for industrial
and commercial customers.
Responding With New Producte
We're continually evaluating energy needs
and strategic opportunities to offer new
products and services.
An example is the creation of our gas-
brokering services in 1994. This business area
offers gas customers the option of competi-
tively purchasing their natural gas through
BGE. Under this option, we will arrange for
acquisition of natural gas and transportation
from BGE's connection points with interstate
pipelines to customers' meters.
▲ In a two-year
BGE pilot program,
McCormick & Company,
Incorporated, the largest
spice company in the
world, is testing real-time
pricing, a rate system
that lets customers run
equipment more cost-effi-
ciently by scheduling
power use when electric
rates are low.
"Real-time pricing could
save McCormick as
much as $200,000 a
year," says BGE Senior
Engineer Anne Eisele,
shown with McCormick
Industrial Engineer Pete
Petrossian. McCormick
plans to use real-time
pricing when operating
equipment in its blending
and packaging plants.PHASE
poisil
SCHON
Bricol
As part of BGE's efforts to provide a complete portfolio of
energy products and services, we are greatly expanding our gas
business. In the fall of 1994, the PSC approved BGE's plans to
enter the natural gas-brokering business, a new market
resulting from gas industry deregulation.
"For the first time, BGE is buying and selling gas as a
commodity for its delivery-service customers, instead of simply
acting as the carrier for gas delivery," says Mary Madigan,
Natural Gas Marketer, shown in the company's gas
control room.
4 In 1994, BGE responded to customers' requests for gas for
both home and business use by installing 161 miles of new gas
main and adding more than 9,500 new customers.
15.16.
▲ Through a strong synergy between BGE and its Constellation
Holdings subsidiaries, the company proposed a 10-year, multi-
million-dollar contract to Johns Hopkins Hospital and University
that includes long-term energy supply, building construction, and
energy system management. Constellation Real Estate Group
President Rand Griffin, right, discusses the project with BGE's
Vice President of Marketing & Sales Steve Wood and Hopkins'
Vice President of Facilities Sally MacConnell.
"We're working to develop tighter energy partnerships with our
customers and with BGE's subsidiaries to service those customers,
Wood says. "Whenever our customers think of energy, we want them
to think of BGE."
38
In 1994, BGE prepared to expand its home appliance and
electronic sales and service businesses by creating a new subsidiary,
BGE Home Products & Services.
"When I talk to customers, I can see they feel good about dealing
with us because of our reputation. That's trust-something that
doesn't come in a toolbox," says Heating Technician Larry Krause,
an employee of the new subsidiary. "We've built that trust over time.
It's one of the things I like best about wearing this uniform."BGE: Still Your Best Choice
DIVERSIFIED BUSINESSES
GE's diversified subsidiaries, which are
grouped under Constellation Holdings
and BGE Home Products & Services
capitalize on opportunities in nontraditional
areas such as wholesale power projects, real
estate, financial investments, health services,
and appliance sales and service contracts.
Competition is changing the relationship between BGE and its diversified businesses
by illuminating a combined strength that benefits both sides. "Competition is a
two-way street. While opening doors for others to compete in our territory, it opens
doors for BGE and its subsidiaries," says Bruce Ambler, President and CEO of
BGE's Constellation Holdings.
Working Together for Success
Last year our Constellation Companies
worked with BGE to develop proposals based
on customer requirements and devised plans to
meet specific needs. A good example was the
proposal to provide energy and real estate
services to the Johns Hopkins Hospital and
University.
Because Our
BGE will construct a state-of-the-art ice storage
system and provide a new electrical supply
arrangement to meet Hopkins' energy savings
and reliability needs. Constellation Energy has
proposed operating most of Hopkins' energy
systems. Constellation Real Estate Group plans
to develop high quality research space for the
Johns Hopkins University. And BGE will
continue to supply gas and electric service to
meet Hopkins' expansion plans. The proposed
contract has a 10-year term.
Diversified Businesses Are Pursuing Growth
Our diversified businesses are individually
pursuing growth opportunities as well.
Constellation Energy continues successful
Add Value
ownership and management of wholesale
energy projects. Constellation Real Estate
Group is reducing its holdings, while
moving from an asset-based to a service-
oriented company that will market its expertise in
construction, asset management, and property
development. Constellation Health Services, a
division of the Real Estate Group, is developing
over 15 assisted-living projects for seniors at sites
throughout the Mid-Atlantic states. Constellation
Investments continues to provide a financial base
of current income and financial credibility to
support the Constellation Companies, while also
providing cost-effective management of BGE's
pension plan and nuclear decommissioning fund.
BGE Creates New Subsidiary
In 1994, we created the BGE Home Products &
Services subsidiary to oversee our 11 appliance
and home electronics centers, plus our gas
and electric appliance service business. In
December, Home Products & Services increased
its capabilities by purchasing Maryland
Environmental Systems, Inc. (MESI), a
successful local business providing service and
installation for heating, air conditioning, energy
management, plumbing and electrical systems
for residential, commercial, and industrial
customers. MESI's owner and president,
William H. Munn, was named President and
Chief Executive Officer of BGE Home Products
& Services effective January 1, 1995.
Bruce M. Ambler
"The combination
of BGE's utility
experience with
the subsidiaries'
experience in
nonregulated
markets gives us
a powerful
advantage,
especially in
retaining
customers."
17.BGE: Still Your Best Choice
Because We're
INVESTING IN THE FUTURE
of Our Communities
We view our community efforts as investments of company resources that
will pay dividends in the future. "We will work in areas that represent the
greatest community challenges areas such as economic development,
environmental protection, energy conservation, and social issues,” says
Joe Tiernan, BGE's Vice President of Corporate Affairs. "Our
objective is to help improve the quality of life and business in Maryland."
L
ast year, BGE surveyed 5,000 Maryland
leaders, asking their opinions of
BGE's community programs. They
told us they have high expectations for BGE
involvement in efforts to address community
problems. And we're listening.
We're Focusing on Economic Development
As a major Maryland business and employer,
BGE recognizes that the community's future is
linked to its economic health. In 1994, we
collaborated with government and private
agencies to help make Maryland more
attractive for businesses to locate or expand.
We've restructured our own economic
development office so that BGE can play a
greater role in encouraging businesses to move
to or expand in the state. We're also proposing
an economic development rate for new and
expanding Maryland businesses; the rate would
provide a reduction in energy costs for a five-
year period. We will submit this proposal in
1995 to the PSC for approval.
18.
Investing Where We Can Have an Impact
In 1994, we launched several projects that illus-
trate our commitment to investing in the future.
In concert with federal and state
agencies, we worked on an impor-
tant wetlands mitigation project.
Required to mitigate for 15 acres
of wetlands affected by construction
of a transmission line, we created the 22-acre
Patuxent Wildlife Viewing Area that will open
to the public this year. The U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service has hailed the Patuxent
wetlands project as one of the finest examples of
created wetlands it has
een.
In 1994, we also committed a significant
portion of our corporate contributions budget
to ongoing support of childhood development
programs. Our early childhood development
grant program awarded funds totaling
$1.1 million to be paid over three years.
Grants were awarded to programs that
address the effects that family problems such
as teen pregnancy, drug and alcohol addiction,
and a lack of parenting skills-have on
young children.
Our employees are also well known for their
service to the community. In 1994, nearly
6,000 BGE employees and retirees volunteered
at 128 community events, raising $1.3 million.
When BGE extended
a transmission line
through sensitive
wetlands, regulations
required us to assess
the impact and replace
disturbed wetlands.
BGE went further by
designing a new
22-acre wetland and
creating a public
wildlife viewing area.
"The Patuxent wetlands
are a great example of
how productive the
partnership between
industry and govern-
ment can be," says
BGE Environmental
Scientist Joe Barley.
"This was the perfect
opportunity for the
company to demonstrate
its commitment
to environmental
responsibility."▲ In September, BGE announced a major refocusing of its corporate
contributions strategy with the award of $1.1 million in grants over the
next three years to seven early childhood development programs.
"We've shifted our focus toward early childhood development because
we can make a greater social impact by reaching children at a younger
age and by strengthening their parents' life skills," says Malinda Small,
Corporate Contributions Administrator. Small is shown with children at
the Farring Family Learning Center, a grant recipient, which helps
parents of young children develop parenting, literacy, and job skills.
BGE's economic development efforts include a highly successful
Procurement Opportunity Program, which works to ensure minority-
and women-owned firms have equal opportunities to work with BGE.
Through the program's efforts, our contracts with minority and women-
owned businesses rose to $50 million last year.
Minority Contracts
Dramatically Increase
(Millions of Dollars)
$50
$40
$30
$20
$10
0
1986 1988 1990 1992 1994
19.Glossary of Terms
bulk power transaction-an exchange of power between
bulk power suppliers and wholesale customers, usually to
improve reliability and/or reduce costs.
capacity the maximum amount of power a generating unit
or plant is capable of producing, measured in kilowatts or
megawatts.
combination utility-a utility that offers more than one type
of service, such as electric and gas.
delivery service customer-a utility customer that buys gas
from one source then contracts with the local utility to
transport it through the utility's gas distribution system.
district chilled-water system a central plant with a contin-
uous loop distribution system that supplies chilled water for
space cooling to multiple buildings, eliminating the need for
bulky individual refrigeration systems.
distribution in the electric business, the system of substa-
tions, transformers, poles, and wires that connects customers'
businesses and homes with the utility's transmission system;
in the gas business, the system of gas mains and service lines
that connects interstate customers with gas pipelines.
Energy Policy Act of 1992—legislation passed by Congress
to promote efficiency in the electric energy market by
allowing competition for bulk power.
franchise the exclusive right to sell electricity or distribute
natural gas in a specified geographical area subject to
government regulations for a fixed or perpetual term.
gas brokering the process of buying gas from suppliers for
resale to individual gas users, a new business created by gas
industry deregulation.
gate station-the point in the natural gas transportation
system where natural gas enters the local utility's
distribution system.
generation-assets required to produce electrical energy,
including boilers, turbines, electric generators, and support
systems.
load management programs—actions designed to reduce
electric demand during peak generating periods.
20.
local distribution company-a company that transports
natural gas from the pipeline to gas customers through a gas
distribution delivery system.
municipal utility-a utility system owned and operated by a
municipality that usually, but not always, provides service
only within its boundaries.
off-site meter reading a system of gas and electric meters
equipped with electronic transmitters that enables a utility to
collect data through a handheld device without entering
customers' homes and businesses.
Order 636 the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
ruling that unbundled gas services, giving users a variety of
purchasing, transportation, brokering and storage options.
PJM (Pennsylvania-New Jersey-Maryland
Interconnection)-a Mid-Atlantic power pool consisting
of eight electric companies.
power pool-two or more interconnected electric systems
planned, operated, and maintained to supply power in the
most reliable and economical manner for their combined
load requirements.
real-time pricing-a rate system that provide customers
price information on a real-time basis, which enables these
customers to save money by running equipment when
electric rates are low.
restructuring realigning a utility's business components,
in order to increase management efficiencies and
competitiveness.
retail competition allowing electric customers to choose
their energy suppliers.
rotating outages-deliberately shutting off service to groups
of customers during periods of unusually high demand to
preserve system integrity.
transmission the system of cables, high tension wires,
towers, and transformers that connect generating plants to
distribution systems.
unbundling-segregating a comprehensive service into its
individual components.
wholesale wheeling use of another utility's transmission
facilities to move large quantities of electricity.Utility Construction Expenditures
Millions of Dollars
$600
$500
$400--
$300
$200
$100
0
1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995
(Est.)
Return on
Average Common Equity
12%
10%
8%
67
4%
2%
1990 1991 1992 1993 1994
Electric Peak Load
One Hour-Megawaits
7,000
6,000
5,000
4,000
3,000
Construction
Allowance for Funds
Used During Construction
2,000
1,000
0
1990 1991 1992 1993 1994
Summer Peak
Winter Peak
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and Subsidiaries
Financial Contents
22.
24.
26.
34.
34.
35.
36.
38.
39.
40.
42.
43.
58.
62.
63.
Utility Operating Statistics
Selected Financial Data
Management's Discussion and Analysis
Report of Management
Report of Independent Auditors
Consolidated Statements of Income
Consolidated Balance Sheets
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
Consolidated Statements of Common
Shareholders' Equity
Consolidated Statements of Capitalization
Consolidated Statements of Income Taxes
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
BGE Boards of Directors and Officers
Five-Year Statistical Summary
Shareholder Information
1994 Operating Expenses
Purchased Fuel
and Energy $0.27
Retained in
Business $0.02
Common Stock
Dividends $0.08
Interest and Preferred and
Preference Stock Dividends $0.07
Operations $0.20
Taxes $0.13
Maintenance $0.06
Diversified SG&A $0.06
Depreciation and
Amortization $0.11
21.Electric Operating Statistics
Revenues (In Thousands)
Residential
Commercial
Industrial
System Sales
Interchange Sales
Other
Total
Sales (In Thousands)-MWH
Residential
Commercial
Industrial
System Sales
Interchange Sales
Total
Customers
Residential
Commercial
Industrial
Total
Average Use per Residential Customer-KWH
Average Rate per KWH (System Sales)-
Residential
Commercial
Industrial
Peak Load (One-hour)-MW
Capability at Summer Peak-Mw
System Load Factor
Gas Operating Statistics
Revenues (In Thousands)
Residential
Commercial
Excluding Delivery Service
Delivery Service
Industrial
Excluding Delivery Service
Delivery Service
Other
Total
Sales (In Thousands)-DTH
Residential
Commercial
Excluding Delivery Service
Delivery Service
Industrial
Excluding Delivery Service
Delivery Service
Total
Customers
Residential
Commercial
Industrial
Total
Utility Operating Statistics
Average Use per Residential Customer-Therms
Average Rate per Therm-$
Residential
Commercial (Excluding Delivery Service)
Industrial (Excluding Delivery Service)
Peak Day Sendout-DTH
Peak Day Capability-DTH
1994
$931,711
852,989
205,611
1,990,311
118,027
19,083
$2,127,421
10,670
12,351
4,433
27,454
5,684
33,138
978,591
101,957
3,967
1,084,515
10,903
8.73
6.91
4.64
6,038
6,722
54.7%
$ 262,736
121,005
2,285
20,140
9,635
5,448
$ 421,249
40,279
23,712
6,490
4,410
33,837
108,728
498,152
37,891
1,354
537,397
809
.65
.51
.46
761,900
847,000
1993
$ 931,643
869,829
199,042
2,000,514
91,543
20,090
$2,112,147
10,614
12,395
3,763
26,772
4,149
30,921
968,212
100,820
3,800
1,072,832
10,963
8.78
7.02
5.29
5,876
6,701
55.2%
$ 265,601
121,832
3,287
22,250
12,920
7,273
$ 433,163
40,029
23,830
7,428
Utility operating statistics do not reflect the elimination of intercompany transactions.
Certain prior-year amounts have been reclassified to conform to the current year's presentation.
22.
5,298
31,390
107,975
491,165
37,518
1,353
530,036
815
.66
.51
.42
657,700
847,000
1992
$ 839,954
842,694
201,950
1,884,598
64,323
16,611
$1,965,532
9,735
11,909
3,663
25,307
3,180
28,487
956,570
99,673
3,761
1,060,004
10,177
8.63
7.08
5.51
5,558
6,687
54.8%
$ 242,737
112,147
3,591
21,123
14,290
6,511
$ 400,399
39,042
23,478
7,102
5,314
33,638
108,574
486,863
37,000
1,412
525,275
802
.62
.48
.40
609,200
847,000
1991
$ 882,591
850,038
212,864
1,945,493
23,845
21,531
$1,990,869
10,097
11,707
3,708
25,512
1,166
26,678
939,734
98,254
3,584
1,041,572
10,744
8.74
7.26
5.74
5,910
6,608
52.4%
$ 220,653
96,189
3,031
14,855
14,288
6,777
$ 355,793
36,519
20,687
6,433
3,605
34,240
101,484
482,085
36,561
1,385
520,031
758
.60
.46
.41
610,200
817,000
1990
$ 718,032
758,573
194,951
1,671,556
26,629
13,359
$1,711,544
9,283
11,352
3,743
24,378
1,088
25,466
930,880
96,567
3,526
1,030,973
9,973
7.73
6.68
5.21
5,477
6,159
54.1%
$ 218,967
89,573
3,304
32,439
17,851
9,197
$ 371,331
35,026
18,164
5,872
7,305
34,720
101,087
482,680
35,953
1,401
520,034
726
.63
.49
,44
653,900
853,000
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and Subsidiaries1989
$ 648,883
668,819
191,796
1,509,498
17,802
19,556
$1,546,856
9,451
11,079
4,261
24,791
595
25,386
913,910
95,102
3,132
1,012,144
10,341
6.87
6.04
4.50
5,304
6,164
57,4%
$ 242,389
112,630
4,409
18,363
22,661
11,349
$ 411,801
39,806
21,964
5,778
3,697
39,452
110,697
482,538
35,790
1,398
519,726
825
.61
.51
.50
663,200
761,000
1988
$ 620,660
627,661
177,366
1,425,687
43,919
22,528
$1,492,134
9,196
10,636
4,148
23,980
2,052
26,032
895,881
92,639
2,585
991,105
10,265
6.75
5.90
4.28
5,381
5,930
54.6%
$ 225,035
105,352
2,748
23,679
16,616
8,106
$ 381,536
40,140
22,738
5,025
5,824
35,802
109,529
482,011
35,431
1,311
518,753
833
.56
.46
.41
669,500
793,000
1987
$ 594,283
610,011
181,034
1,385,328
32,368
18,264
$1,435,960
8,521
10,014
4,040
22,575
1,266
23,841
876,826
89,121
2,521
968,468
9,718
6.97
6.09
4.48
5,190
5,888
53.2%
$ 242,240
110,384
3,216
19,869
20,276
19,471
$ 415,456
38,142
20,643
5,272
4,038
34,846
102,941
482,023
34,820
1,289
518,132
791
.64
.54
.49
636,000
731,000
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and Subsidiaries
1986
$575,774
611,500
192,189
1,379,463
93,365
11,733
$1,484,561
7,798
9,383
4,055
21,236
4,010
25,246
853,976
85,816
2,522
942,314
9,131
7.38
6.52
4.74
4,618
5,797
56.3%
$ 258,975
125,448
2,825
29,312
15,600
13,609
$ 445,769
38,630
21,607
4,643
5,587
26,909
97,376
482,394
34,398
1,295
518,087
801
.67
.58
.52
624,700
748,000
1985
$ 528,676
566,365
196,656
1,291,697
53,583
19,055
$1,364,335
7,084
8,829
3,786
19,699
1,956
21,655
831,423
82,751
2,504
916,678
8,520
7.46
6.41
5.19
4,458
5,586
55.4%
$ 256,499
128,737
2,234
43,620
15,861
6,358
$ 453,309
36,381
21,636
4,079
8,272
26,513
96,881
481,188
33,870
1,305
516,363
756
.71
.60
.53
677,300
827,000
1984
$ 491,069
525,738
182,471
1,199,278
100,469
23,120
$1,322,867
6,897
8,390
3,948
19,235
2,794
22,029
811,771
79,846
2,560
894,177
8,496
7.12
6.27
4.62
4,230
5,498
55.2%
$ 293,158
160,877
695
79,596
12,948
6,055
$ 553,329
39,906
25,247
1,301
13,790
21,227
101,471
480,613
33,483
1,348
515,444
830
.73
.64
.58
607,200
827,000
Compound Growth
10-Year
5-Year
7.50%
4.98
1.40
5.69
45.98
(0.49)
6.58
2.46
2.20
0.79
2.06
57.05
5.47
1.38
1.40
4.84
1.39
1,06
4.91
2.73
0.61
2.63
1.75
(0.96)
1.63
1.44
(12.32)
1.86
(15.72)
(13.65)
0.45
0.24
1.54
2.35
3.59
(3.02)
(0.36)
0.64
1.15
(0.64)
0.67
(0.39)
1.28
(1.65)
2.81
2.16
6.61%
4.96
1.20
5.20
1.62
(1.90)
4.87
4.46
3.94
1.17
3.62
7.36
4.17
1.89
2.47
4.48
1.95
2.53
2.06
0.98
0.04
3.62
2.03
(0.09)
(1.09)
(2.81)
12.64
(12.84)
(2.91)
(1.05)
(2.69)
0.09
(0.63)
17.43
(10.77)
4.77
0.69
0.36
1.24
0.04
0.42
(0.26)
(1.15)
(2.24)
(2.29)
2.30
0.24
23.Summary of Operations
Total Revenues
Expenses Other Than Interest and Income Taxes
Income From Operations
Other Income
Income Before Interest and Income Taxes
Interest Expense
Income Before Income Taxes
Income Taxes
Income Before Cumulative Effect of Changes in
Accounting Methods
Cumulative Effect of Change in the Method of
Accounting for Income Taxes
Cumulative Effect of Change in the Method of
Accounting for Unbilled Revenues, Net of Taxes
Net Income
Preferred and Preference Stock Dividends
Earnings Applicable to Common Stock
24.
Earnings Per Share of Common Stock
Before Cumulative Effect of Changes
in Accounting Methods
Selected Financial Data
Cumulative Effect of Change in the Method of
Accounting for Income Taxes
Cumulative Effect of Change in the Method of
Accounting for Unbilled Revenues
Total Earnings Per Share of Common Stock
Dividends Declared Per Share of Common Stock
Ratio of Earnings to Fixed Charges
Ratio of Earnings to Fixed Charges and Preferred
and Preference Stock Dividends Combined
Financial Statistics at Year End
Total Assets
Capitalization
Long-term debt
Preferred stock
Book Value Per Share of Common Stock
Redeemable preference stock
Preference stock not subject to mandatory redemption
Common shareholders' equity
Total capitalization
1994
$2,782,985
2,147,726
635,259
32,365
667,624
190,154
477,470
153,853
323,617
323,617
39,922
$ 283,695
$1.93
$1.93
$1.51
3.14
2.47
$8,143,538
$18.42
1993
81,505
Number of Common Shareholders
Certain prior-year amounts have been reclassified to conform to the current year's presentation.
$2,741,385
$2,559,536
2,124,993 2,024,227 2,026,910
616,392
20,310
636,702
188,764
447,938
138,072
309,866
309,866
41,839
$ 268,027
$1.85
$1.85
$1.47
3.00
2.34
$7,987,039
1992
$17.94
82,287
535,309
22,132
557,441
189,747
367,694
103,347
264,347
$1.63
$2,584,932
$2,823,144
59,185
59,185
279,500
342,500
150,000
150,000
2,717,866 2,620,511
$5,791,483 $5,995,340 $5,476,274
$1.63
$1.43
2.65
2.08
1991
1990
(Dollar amounts in thousands,
264,347
253,426
42,247
42,746
$ 222,100 $ 210,680
$2,514,631 $2,248,613
1,922,498
487,721
28,095
$17.63
515,816
196,588
80,371
319,228
85,547
233,681
19,745
$1.51
.16
$1.67
$7,374,357 $7,137,989
$1.40
2.27
1.82
$2,376,950 $2,390,115
59,185
59,185
395,500
398,500
110,000
110,000
$17.00
326,115
34,488
71,131
360,603
165,205
195,398
19,952
175,446
37,754
213,200
40,261
$ 172,939
$1.09
.31
$1.40
$2,193,844
59,185
365,000
110,000
2,534,639 2,153,306 2,073,158
$5,111,106
$4,801,187
$1.40
1.78
1.47
$6,710,375
$16.58
73,049
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and Subsidiaries1989
except per share amounts)
$2,104,403
1,624,850
479,553
27,960
507,513
149,593
357,920
81,629
276,291
276,291
32,381
$ 243,910
$2.03
$2.03
$1.38
3.02
2.44
$5,985,679
$2,076,620
59,185
322,800
110,000
2,001,188
$4,569,793
$16.60
75,762
1988
$1,989,660
1,487,891
501,769
18,735
520,504
123,996
396,508
93,096
303,412
303,412
29,375
$ 274,037
$2.31
$2.31
$1.32
3.71
2.94
$5,126,362
$1,769,066
59,185
229,600
110,000
1,885,245
$4,053,096
$15.85
79,808
1987
$1,941,382
1,413,714
527,668
18,600
546,268
115,802
430,466
130,368
300,098
300,098
26,406
$ 273,692
$2.31
$2.31
$1.25
4.17
3.26
$4,780,167
$1,707,407
59,185
186,400
110,000
1,755,368
$3,818,360
$14.83
82,281
Baltimore Gus and Electric Company and Subsidiaries
1986
$2,005,344
1,494,050
511,294
17,244
528,538
112,742
415,796
141,177
274,619
274,619
26,876
$ 247,743
$2.10
$2.10
$1.18
4.19
3.20
$4,582,670
$1,596,275
59,185
50,000
110,000
1,629,795
$3,445,255
$13.81
76,972
1985
$1,879,208
1,383,998
495,210
14,120
509,330
110,202
399,128
151,828
247,300
247,300
27,370
$ 219,930
$1.87
$1.87
$1.11
4,14
3.08
$4,273,721
$1,494,442
59,185
80,000
175,000
1,521,960
$3,330,587
$12.91
79,474
1984
$1,932,399
1,464,071
468,328
20,595
488,923
98,648
390,275
146,360
243,915
243,915
27,580
$ 216,335
$1.85
$1.85
$1.03
4.23
3.10
$4,050,450
$1,414,285
59,185
90,000
175,000
1,433,776
$3,172,246
$12.16
81,601
Compound Growth
5-Year 10-Year
5.75%
5.74
5.78
2.97
5.64
4.92
5.93
13.51
3.21
I
3.21
4.28
3.07
(1.01)
(1.01)
1.82
0.78
0.24
6.35
4.48
(2.84)
6.40
6.31
4.85
2.10
1.47
3.71%
3.91
3.10
4.62
3.16
6.78
2.04
0.50
2.87
2.87
3.77
2.75
0.42
0.42
3.90
(2.94)
(2.25)
7.23
6.22
12.00
(1.53)
6.60
6.20
4.24
(0.01)
25.This annual report presents the financial condition and results of
operations of Baltimore Gas and Electric Company (BGE) and
its subsidiaries (collectively, the Company). Among other infor-
mation, it provides Consolidated Financial Statements, Notes to
Consolidated Financial Statements (Notes), Utility Operating
Statistics, and Selected Financial Data. The following discussion
explains factors that significantly affect the Company's results of
operations, liquidity, and capital resources.
Management's Discussion and Analysis of
Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Results of Operations
Earnings per Share of Common Stock
Consolidated earnings per share were $1.93 for 1994 and $1.85
for 1993, an increase of $.08 and $.22 from prior-year amounts,
respectively. The changes in earnings per share reflect a higher
level of earnings applicable to common stock, offset partially by
the larger number of outstanding common shares. The summary
below presents the earnings-per-share amounts.
Utility business
Diversified businesses
Total
1994
$1.81
.12
$1.93
1993 1992
$1.77 $1.52
.08 .11
$1.85 $1.63
Earnings Applicable to Common Stock
Earnings applicable to common stock increased $15.7 million in
1994 and $45.9 million in 1993. The 1994 increase reflects
higher utility and diversified businesses earnings. The 1993
increase reflects higher utility earnings, slightly offset by lower
earnings from diversified businesses.
26.
Utility earnings increased in 1994 compared to the prior year
due to three principal factors: lower operations and maintenance
expenses; an increase in the allowance for funds used during
construction; and greater sales of electricity. The higher sales of
electricity are primarily due to an increased number of customers
compared to 1993. The 1994 earnings increase was offset
partially by higher depreciation and amortization expense, which
includes the write-off of certain Perryman costs (see discussion
on page 29). Utility earnings increased in 1993 over 1992
because BGE sold more electricity than in the previous year and
because of increased base rates. Three factors produced the
increase in sales of electricity: the summer of 1993 was hotter
than 1992; commercial customers used more electricity; and the
number of residential customers increased. The effect of weather
on utility sales is discussed below. The 1993 earnings increases
were offset partially by higher operations and maintenance
expenses, depreciation and amortization expense, property taxes,
and the effect of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993
(1993 Tax Act), which increased the federal corporate income tax
rate to 35% from 34%.
The following factors influence BGE's utility operations
earnings: regulation by the Public Service Commission of
Maryland (PSC); the effect of weather and economic conditions
Effective July 1, 1994, BGE formed a wholly owned
subsidiary, BGE Home Products & Services, Inc. (HPS),
consisting of BGE's existing merchandise and gas and appliance
service operations. HPS' revenues and expenses are included in
diversified businesses revenues and diversified businesses
selling, general, and administrative expenses, respectively. Prior-
year amounts have been reclassified to conform with the current
year's presentation.
on sales; and competition in the generation and sale of electricity.
The base rate increases authorized by the PSC in April 1993
favorably affected utility earnings through April 1994. Several
electric fuel rate cases now pending before the PSC discussed in
Notes I and 13 could also affect future years' earnings.
Future competition may also affect earnings in ways that are
not possible to predict (see discussion on page 33).
Earnings from diversified businesses, which primarily
represent the operations of Constellation Holdings, Inc. (CHI)
and its subsidiaries (collectively, the Constellation Companies)
and BGE Home Products & Services, Inc. (HPS), increased
during 1994 and decreased during 1993. The reasons for these
changes are discussed in the "Diversified Businesses Earnings"
section on pages 30 and 31.
Effect of Weather on Utility Sales
Weather conditions affect BGE's utility sales. BGE measures
weather conditions using degree days. A degree day is the
difference between the average daily actual temperature and the
baseline temperature of 65 degrees. Hotter weather during the
summer, measured by more cooling degree days, results in
greater demand for electricity to operate cooling systems.
Conversely, cooler weather during the summer, measured by
fewer cooling degree days, results in less demand for electricity
to operate cooling systems. Colder weather during the winter, as
measured by greater heating degree days, results in greater
demand for electricity and gas to operate heating systems.
Conversely, warmer weather during the winter, measured by
fewer heating degree days, results in less demand for electricity
and gas to operate heating systems. The degree-days chart below
presents information regarding cooling and heating degree days
for 1994 and 1993.
Cooling degree days
Percentage change
compared to prior year
Heating degree days
Percentage change
compared to prior year
1994
949
9.7%
4,670
30-Year
1993 Average
865
804
22.3%
4,959 4,901
(5.8)% (0.3)%
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and SubsidiariesBGE Utility Revenues and Sales
Electric revenues changed during 1994 and 1993 because of the
following factors:
System sales volumes
Base rates
Fuel rates
Revenues from system sales
Interchange sales
Other revenues
Total electric revenues
1994
Residential
Commercial
Industrial
Total
$9.9
1.4
(21.5)
(In millions)
(10.2)
26.5
(1,9)
$14.4
1994
Electric system sales represent volumes sold to customers
within BGE's service territory at rates determined by the PSC.
These amounts exclude interchange sales, discussed separately
later. Below is a comparison of the changes in electric system
sales volumes.
0.5%
(0.4)
17.8
2.5
1993
$112.4
58.5
(55.0)
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and Subsidiaries
115.9
27.2
3.5
$146.6
1993
9.0%
4.1
2.7
5.8
Sales to residential and commercial customers were essen-
tially unchanged from the prior year due to three factors: the
number of customers increased; higher sales from extreme
weather conditions early in the year slightly exceeded lower sales
from milder weather in the second half of the year; and usage-
per-customer decreased. Sales to industrial customers reflect
primarily an increase in the sale of electricity to Bethlehem Steel,
which purchased more electricity from BGE due to increased
steel production and the fact that Bethlehem Steel is now
purchasing its full electricity requirements from BGE. Bethlehem
Steel is still producing power with its own generating facility, but
is now selling the output from this facility to BGE rather than
using the power to reduce its requirements, Hotter summer
weather was the main reason for the increase in total sales in
1993. The sales increases to the residential and commercial
customers reflect significantly hotter summer weather, and to a
lesser extent, increased usage and customer growth. Sales to the
industrial class reflect increased sales of electricity to Bethlehem
Steel to support its increased steel production during 1993.
Base rates increased slightly during 1994 due to the remaining
effect of the PSC's April 1993 rate order, offset partially by the
deferral of the portion of energy conservation surcharge billings
subject to refund. Base rates increased in 1993 due to the PSC's
April 1993 rate order and an increased recovery of eligible
electric conservation program costs through the energy conser-
vation surcharge.
The April 1993 rate order for an annualized electric base rate
increase of $84.9 million provided for a higher level of operating
expenses and a return on BGE's higher level of electric rate base.
The order also reduced the authorized rate of return to 9.40%
from the previous rate of 9.94%.
Under the energy conservation surcharge, if the PSC deter-
mines that BGE is earning in excess of its authorized rate of
return, BGE will have to refund (by means of lowering future
surcharges) a portion of energy conservation surcharge revenues
to its customers. The portion subject to the refund is compen-
sation for foregone sales from conservation programs and incen-
tives for achieving conservation goals and will be refunded to
customers with interest beginning in the ensuing July when the
annual resetting of the conservation surcharge rates occurs. BGE
earned in excess of its authorized rate of return on electric opera-
tions for the period July 1, 1993 through June 30, 1994. As a
result, BGE deferred the portion of electric energy conservation
revenues subject to refund for the period December 1993 through
November 1994. The deferral of these billings totaled $20.1
million.
Changes in fuel rate revenues result from the operation of the
electric fuel rate formula. The fuel rate formula is designed to
recover the actual cost of fuel, net of revenues from interchange
sales (see Notes 1 and 13). Changes in fuel rate revenues and
interchange sales normally do not affect earnings. However, if
the PSC were to disallow recovery of any part of these costs,
earnings would be reduced as discussed in Note 13.
Fuel rate revenues decreased during both 1994 and 1993 due
to a lower fuel rate, offset partially by increased electric system
sales volumes. The rate was lower in both years because of a
less-costly twenty-four month generation mix from greater
generation at the Calvert Cliffs Nuclear Power Plant compared to
the previous year, BGE expects electric fuel rate revenues to
remain relatively constant through 1995.
Interchange sales are sales of BGE's energy to the
Pennsylvania-New Jersey-Maryland Interconnection (PJM), a
regional power pool of eight member companies including BGE.
Interchange sales occur after BGE has satisfied the demand for
its own system sales of electricity, if BGE's available generation
is the least costly available to PJM utilities. Interchange sales
increased during 1994 and 1993 because BGE had a less-costly
generation mix than other PJM utilities. The less-costly mix
reflects greater generation from the Brandon Shores Power Plant
and the operation of the Calvert Cliffs Nuclear Power Plant.
27.Gas revenues decreased during 1994 and increased during
1993 because of the following factors:
Sales volumes
Base rates
Gas cost adjustment revenues
Other revenues
Total gas revenues
Residential
Commercial
Industrial
Total
1994
28.
(In millions)
$ 3.6
2.4
(16.1)
(1.8)
$(11.9)
The changes in gas sales volumes compared to the year before
were:
1994
0.6%
1993
(3.4)
4.2
0.7
$ 0.6
2.6
28.8
0.8
$32.8
1993
2.5%
2.2
(5.8)
(0.6)
Total gas sales increased during 1994 because of higher sales
to residential and industrial customers, offset partially by lower
sales to commercial customers. Sales to industrial customers
reflect primarily greater usage of natural gas by Bethlehem Steel,
Sales to commercial and industrial customers were negatively
impacted because delivery service customers either voluntarily
switched their fuel source from natural gas to alternate fuels, or
were involuntarily interrupted by BGE as a result of extreme
winter weather conditions in the first quarter of 1994.
Interruptible customers maintain alternate fuel sources and pay
reduced rates in exchange for BGE's right to interrupt service
during periods of peak demand. Total gas sales decreased during
1993 because of lower sales to industrial customers, offset
partially by increased sales to the remainder of the gas-system
customers. Sales to industrial customers decreased primarily
because of lower use of delivery service gas by Bethlehem Steel
and interruptible service customers, who increased their use of
alternative fuels. Gas sales to Bethlehem Steel also decreased
because of a maintenance outage at their L-Blast furnace. The
increases in sales to the residential and commercial classes of
customers reflect the colder winter weather during the first
quarter of 1993 and an increase in the number of customers.
Base rates increased slightly in 1994 due to an increased
recovery of eligible gas conservation program costs through the
energy conservation surcharge. Base rates increased in 1993 for
two reasons: the PSC's April 1993 rate order and an increased
recovery of eligible gas conservation program costs through the
energy conservation surcharge. The April 1993 rate order for an
annualized gas base rate increase of $1.6 million provided a
return on BGE's higher level of gas rate base.
Changes in gas cost adjustment revenues result primarily from
the operation of the purchased gas adjustment clauses which are
designed to recover actual gas costs (see Note 1). Changes in gas
cost adjustment revenues normally do not affect earnings. Gas
cost adjustment revenues decreased during 1994 primarily
because of decreased prices of purchased gas and slightly lower
sales volumes subject to the clauses. Gas cost adjustment
revenues increased during 1993 primarily because of increased
prices to recover higher costs of purchased gas and higher sales
volumes subject to gas cost adjustment clauses. Delivery service
sales volumes are not subject to gas cost adjustment clauses
because delivery service customers purchase their gas directly
from third parties.
BGE Utility Fuel and Energy Expenses
Electric fuel and purchased energy expenses were as follows:
1994 1993 1992
(In millions)
$541.2 $483.9 $445.2
Actual costs
Net recovery of costs
inder electric fuel rate
clause (see Note 1)
Total expense
1.1 50.7 111.0
$542.3 $534.6 $556.2
Actual electric fuel and purchased energy costs increased
during 1994 as a result of a more costly actual generation mix
and an increase in the net output of electricity generated to meet
the demand of BGE's system and the PJM system. The cost of
the actual generation mix increased due to higher purchased
energy costs and scheduled outages at the Calvert Cliffs Nuclear
Power Plant in 1994. Actual electric fuel and purchased energy
costs during 1993 increased for two reasons; a higher net output
of electricity generated to meet the demand of BGE's system and
the PJM system and higher purchased-capacity costs under the
Pennsylvania Power & Light Company Energy and Capacity
Purchase Agreement.
Purchased
gas expenses were as follows:
1994
Actual costs
Net (deferral) recovery of costs
under purchased gas adjustment
clause (see Note 1)
Total expense
$222.7
1993 1992
(In millions)
$246.4 $213.6
1,9 (3.7) 0.5
$224.6 $242.7 $214.1
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and SubsidiariesActual purchased gas costs decreased during 1994 for two
reasons: lower gas prices and lower output associated with the
decreased demand for BGE gas. The lower gas prices reflect
market conditions and take-or-pay and other supplier refunds,
offset by higher costs related to the implementation of Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) Order 636 and higher
demand charges. Actual purchased gas costs increased in 1993
for three reasons: higher gas prices caused by market conditions;
higher reservation charges; and higher output to meet greater
demand for BGE gas.
Purchased gas costs exclude gas purchased by delivery service
customers, including Bethlehem Steel, who obtain gas directly
from third parties. Future purchased gas costs are expected to
increase due to transition costs incurred by BGE gas pipeline
suppliers in implementing FERC Order No. 636. These transition
costs, if approved by FERC, will be passed on to BGE customers
through the purchased gas adjustment clause.
Other Operating Expenses
In 1994, in order to more accurately reflect utility operations
expense, BGE reclassified the amortization of deferred energy
conservation expenditures and deferred nuclear expenditures from
operations expense to depreciation and amortization expense. In
addition, BGE reclassified diversified businesses' expenses from
operations expense to diversified businesses-selling, general,
and administrative expense. Prior-year amounts have been reclas-
sified to conform with the current year's presentation.
Operations expense decreased during 1994 primarily due to
labor savings achieved as a result of the Company's employee
reduction programs discussed in Note 7 and continuing cost
control efforts. These savings offset higher expense from the
amortization of the cost of the 1993 and 1992 Voluntary Special
Early Retirement Programs (VSERP) and a $10.0 million charge
for a bonus paid to employees in lieu of a general wage increase.
In addition, operations expense for 1994 decreased because oper-
ations expense for 1993 included a $17.2 million charge for
certain employee reduction programs, offset partially by a credit
to expense equivalent to the $9.8 million cost of termination
benefits associated with the Company's 1992 VSERP.
Operations expense increased during 1993 due to higher labor
costs, employee reduction expenses (see Note 7), postretirement
benefit expenses resulting from the implementation of Statement
of Financial Accounting Standards No. 106 (see Note 6), and
higher nuclear operating costs. These increases were offset
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and Subsidiaries
partially by the 1993 reversal of the $9.8 million charge origi-
nally recorded in 1992 for termination benefits associated with
the Company's 1992 VSERP to reflect the ratemaking treatment
adopted by the PSC in its April 1993 rate order.
Operations expense is expected to be reduced in 1995 due to
the realization of a full year of cost savings from the employee
reduction programs and continuing cost control efforts. These
lower costs are expected to exceed other increases in operations
expenses.
Maintenance expense decreased during 1994 due primarily to
lower costs at the Calvert Cliffs Nuclear Power Plant. Mainte-
nance expense increased in 1993 because of higher labor costs
and higher costs at the Calvert Cliffs Nuclear Power Plant.
Depreciation and amortization expense increased during 1994
because of the write-off of certain Perryman costs discussed
below. Additionally, depreciation and amortization expense
increased in 1994 and 1993 because of higher depreciable plant
in service and higher levels of energy conservation program
costs. The increase in depreciable plant in service resulted from
the addition of electric transmission and distribution plant and
certain capital additions at the lvert Cliffs Nuclear Pow Plant
during 1994 and 1993.
Initially, BGE had planned to build two combined cycle
generating units at its Perryman site. However, due to significant
changes in the environment in which utilities operate, BGE now
has no plans to construct the second combined cycle generating
unit. Accordingly, during the third quarter of 1994, BGE wrote
off $15.7 million of the costs associated with that second
combined cycle unit. This write-off reduced after-tax earnings
during 1994 by $11.0 million or 7 cents per share. Work on the
first 140mw combustion turbine at Perryman continues to be on
schedule for commercial operation in 1995.
Depreciation and amortization expense in 1995 will be
affected by the completion of a facility-specific study of the cost
to decommission the Calvert Cliffs Nuclear Power Plant. This
study generated a higher decommissioning cost than the prior
estimate which will increase depreciation expense $9 million
annually. In addition, the PSC issued an order adjusting BGE's
utility plant depreciation rates to reflect the results of a detailed
depreciation study. The new depreciation rates are expected to
result in an increase in depreciation accruals of approximately
$21 million annually. BGE plans to defer the increased depreci-
ation accruals for recovery in a future base rate proceeding,
consistent with previous rate actions of the PSC.
29.Taxes other than income taxes increased slightly during 1994
due primarily to higher property taxes resulting from higher
levels of utility plant in service. Taxes other than income taxes
increased during 1993 because of higher property taxes from the
addition of Brandon Shores Unit 2 to the taxable base effective
July 1, 1992, higher franchise taxes because of the increase in
total electric and gas revenues, and increased payroll taxes.
Inflation affects the Company through increased operating
expenses and higher replacement costs for utility plant assets.
Although timely rate increases can lessen the effects of inflation,
the regulatory process imposes a time lag which can delay BGE's
recovery of increased costs. There is a regulatory lag primarily
because rate increases are based on historical costs rather than
projected costs. The PSC has historically allowed recovery of the
cost of replacing plant assets, together with the opportunity to
earn a fair return on BGE's investment, beginning at the time of
replacement.
Other Income and Expenses
The allowance for funds used during construction (AFC)
increased during 1994 because of a higher level of construction
work in progress which was offset partially by the lower AFC
rate established by the PSC in the April 1993 rate order. AFC
was essentially unchanged in 1993 because a higher level of
construction work in progress was offset by the lower AFC rate
discussed above.
Net other income and deductions increased in 1994 primarily
due to a lower level of charitable contributions and gains realized
on the sale of receivables.
Capitalized interest decreased during 1994 due to lower capi-
talized interest on the Constellation Companies' power gener-
ation systems, offset partially by the accrual by BGE of carrying
charges on electric deferred fuel costs excluded from rate base
(see Note 5). Capitalized interest increased during 1993 due to
the accrual of carrying charges on electric deferred fuel costs
excluded from rate base.
Income tax expense increased during both years because of
higher pre-tax earnings. The 1993 increase also reflects the effect
of the 1993 Tax Act, which increased the federal corporate
income tax rate to 35% from 34%, retroactive to January 1, 1993.
As a result, income tax expense related to 1993 operations
increased by $4.6 million and the Company's deferred income
tax liability increased by $20.1 million. The Company deferred
$12.8 million of the increase in the deferred income tax liability
applicable to utility operations for recovery through future rates
and charged the remaining $7.3 million to income tax expense.
Of this $7.3 million charged to expense, $5.8 million pertains to
the Constellation Companies as discussed on page 31.
30.
Diversified Businesses Earnings
Earnings per share from diversified businesses were:
1994
1993
Constellation Holdings, Inc.
Power generation systems
Financial investments
Real estate development and senior
living facilities
Effect of 1993 Tax Act
Other
Total Constellation Holdings, Inc.
BGE Home Products & Services, Inc.
Total diversified businesses
$.10
.03
(.03)
(.01)
.09
.03
$.12
$.07
.10
(.04)
(.04)
(01)
.08
$.08
1992
$.08
.09
(.05)
(.01)
.11
$.11
The Constellation Companies' power generation systems
business includes the development, ownership, management, and
operation of wholesale power generating projects in which the
Constellation Companies hold ownership interests, as well as the
provision of services to power generation projects under oper-
ation and maintenance contracts. Power generation systems
earnings increased in 1994 primarily due to payments for the
curtailment of output at two wholesale power generating projects
as discussed below. Power generation systems earnings during
1993 were essentially unchanged. Earnings for 1993 include
$8.0 million of energy tax credits on the commercial operation of
the Puna geothermal plant, offset by costs incurred at the Panther
Creek waste-coal project in order to resolve fuel quality and
other start-up problems.
The Constellation Companies' investment in wholesale power
generating projects includes $177 million representing ownership
interests in 16 projects which sell electricity in California under
Interim Standard Offer No. 4 power purchase agreements. Under
these agreements, the projects supply electricity to purchasing
utilities at a fixed rate for the first ten years of the agreements
and at variable rates based on the utilities' avoided cost for the
remaining term of the agreements. Avoided cost generally repre-
sents a utility's next lowest cost generation to service the
demands on its system. These power generation projects are
scheduled to convert to supplying electricity at avoided cost rates
in various years beginning in late 1996 through the end of 2000.
As a result of declines in purchasing utilities' avoided costs
subsequent to the inception of these agreements, revenues at
these projects based on current avoided cost levels would be
substantially lower than revenues presently being realized under
the fixed price terms of the agreements. If current avoided cost
levels were to continue into 1996 and beyond, the Constellation
Companies could experience reduced earnings or incur losses
associated with these projects, which could be significant. The
Constellation Companies are investigating and pursuing alterna-
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and Subsidiariestives for certain of these power generation projects including, but
not limited to, repowering the projects to reduce operating costs,
renegotiating the power purchase agreements, and selling its
ownership interests in the projects. Two of these wholesale power
generating projects, in which the Constellation Companies'
investment totals $27.4 million, have executed agreements with
Pacific Gas & Electric (PG&E) providing for the curtailment of
output through the end of the fixed price period in return for
payments from PG&E. The payments from PG&E during the
curtailment period will be sufficient to fully amortize the existing
project finance debt. However, following the curtailment period,
the projects remain contractually obligated to commence
production of electricity at the avoided cost rates, which could
result in reduced earnings or losses for the reasons described
above. The Company cannot predict the impact that these matters
regarding any of the 16 projects may have on the Constellation
Companies or the Company, but the impact could be material.
Earnings from the Constellation Companies' portfolio of
financial investments include capital gains and losses, dividends,
income from financial limited partnerships, and income from
financial guaranty insurance companies. Financial investment
earnings decreased during 1994 due to reduced earnings from
the investment portfolio. Additionally, 1993 results reflected a
$6.1 million gain from the sale of a portion of an investment in
a financial guaranty insurance company. Earnings increased
slightly in 1993 as compared to 1992 because this gain was
substantially offset by lower investment income resulting from
the decline in the size of the investment portfolio due to the sale
of selected assets to provide liquidity for ongoing businesses of
the Constellation Companies.
The Constellation Companies' real estate development
business includes land under development; office buildings; retail
projects; commercial projects; an entertainment, dining and retail
complex in Orlando, Florida; a mixed-use planned-unit-
development; and senior living facilities. The majority of these
projects are in the Baltimore-Washington corridor. They have
been affected adversely by the depressed real estate market and
economic conditions, resulting in reduced demand for the
purchase or lease of available land, office, and retail space.
Earnings from real estate development increased slightly
during 1994 due to gains recognized from the sale of two retail
centers, an office building, and interests in two senior living
facilities. The increases in diversified businesses' revenues and in
selling, general, and administrative expenses reflect the proceeds
of these sales and the cost of the facilities sold, respectively.
Earnings from real estate development and senior living facilities
were essentially unchanged in 1993 because a $2.1 million gain
on the sale of a substantial portion of the investment in senior
living facilities was offset by greater operating losses at other real
estate projects. The senior living facilities which were sold
contributed real estate revenues and operating expenses of
approximately $17 million and $16 million, respectively, in 1993.
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and Subsidiaries
The Constellation Companies' real estate portfolio has experi-
enced continuing carrying costs and depreciation. Additionally,
the Constellation Companies have been expensing rather than
capitalizing interest on certain undeveloped land where devel-
opment activities were at minimal levels. These factors have
affected earnings negatively and are expected to continue to do
so until the levels of undeveloped land are reduced. Cash flow
from real estate operations has been insufficient to cover the debt
service requirements of certain of these projects. Resulting cash
shortfalls have been satisfied through cash infusions from
Constellation Holdings, Inc., which obtained the funds through a
combination of cash flow generated by other Constellation
Companies and its corporate borrowings. To the extent the real
estate market continues to improve, earnings from real estate
activities are expected to improve also.
The Constellation Companies continued investment in real
estate projects is a function of market demand, interest rates,
credit availability, and the strength of the economy in general.
The Constellation Companies' Management believes that
although the real estate market has improved, until the economy
reflects sustained growth and the excess inventory in the market
in the Baltimore-Washington corridor goes down, real estate
values will not improve significantly. If the Constellation
Companies were to sell their real estate projects in the current
depressed market, losses would occur in amounts difficult to
determine. Depending upon market conditions, future sales could
also result in losses. In addition, were the Constellation
Companies to change their intent about any project from an
intent to hold until market conditions improve to an intent to sell,
applicable accounting rules would require a write-down of the
project to market value at the time of such change in intent if
market value is below book value.
The Effect of the 1993 Tax Act represents a $5.8 million
charge to income tax expense to reflect the increase in the
Constellation Companies' deferred income tax liability because
of the increase in the federal corporate tax rate.
BGE Home Products & Services earnings increased during
1994 primarily due to a gain on the sale of receivables.
Environmental Matters
The Company is subject to increasingly stringent federal, state,
and local laws and regulations relating to improving or main-
taining the quality of the environment. These laws and regula-
tions require the Company to remove or remedy the effect on the
environment of the disposal or release of specified substances at
ongoing and former operating sites, including Environmental
Protection Agency Superfund sites. Details regarding these
matters, including financial information, are presented in
Note 13 and in the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K
under Item 1. Business - Environmental Matters.
31.Liquidity and Capital Resources
Capital Requirements
The Company's capital requirements reflect the capital-intensive
nature of the utility business. Actual capital requirements for the
Utility Business:
Construction expenditures (excluding AFC)
Electric
Gas
Common
Total construction expenditures
AFC
Nuclear fuel (uranium purchases and processing charges)
Deferred energy conservation expenditures
Deferred nuclear expenditures
Retirement of long-term debt and redemption of preference stock
Total utility business
Diversified Businesses:
Retirement of long-term debt
Investment requirements
Total diversified businesses
Total
BGE Utility Capital Requirements
BGE's construction program is subject to continuous review and
modification, and actual expenditures may vary from the esti-
mates above. Electric construction expenditures include the
installation of two 5,000 kilowatt diesel generators at Calvert
Cliffs Nuclear Power Plant, one of which is scheduled to be
placed in service in 1995 and the second in 1996; the construc-
tion of a 140-megawatt combustion turbine at Perryman,
scheduled to be placed in service in 1995, which the PSC autho-
rized in an order dated March 25, 1993; and improvements in
BGE's existing generating plants and its transmission and distrib-
ution facilities. Future electric expenditures do not include addi-
tional generating units.
During 1994, 1993, and 1992, the internal generation of cash
from utility operations provided 72%, 71%, and 81% respec-
32.
years 1992 through 1994, along with estimated amounts for the
years 1995 through 1997, are reflected below.
1992
$ 292
36
39
367
22
40
20
16
486
951
118
80
198
$1,149
1993
$ 360
51
44
455
23
47
33
14
907
1,479
222
78
300
$1,779
1994
(In millions)
$339
68
42
449
34
42
41
8
203
777
37
51
1995
88
$865
$233
61
56
350
35 48 4-368 1745 56626
44
122
$867
1996
$219
71
50
340
18
50
43
TTT
98
549
65
70
135
$684
1997
$206
84
35
325
13
52
29
164
583
125
40
165
$748
tively, of the funds required for BGE's capital requirements
exclusive of retirements and redemptions of debt and preference
stock. In addition, in 1994, $70 million of cash was provided by
the sale of certain BGE and HPS receivables (see Note 13).
During the three-year period 1995 through 1997, the Company
expects to provide through utility operations 100% of the funds
required for BGE's capital requirements, exclusive of retirements
and redemptions.
Utility capital requirements not met through the internal gener-
ation of cash are met through the issuance of debt and equity
securities. During the three-year period ended December 31,
1994, BGE's issuances of long-term debt, preference stock, and
common stock were $1,557 million, $130 million, and $448
million, respectively. During the same period, retirements and
redemptions of BGE's long-term debt and preference stock
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and Subsidiariestotaled $1,425 million and $149 million, respectively, exclusive
of any redemption premiums or discounts. The increase in
issuances and retirements of long-term debt during 1993 reflects
the refinancing of a significant portion of BGE's debt in order to
take advantage of the favorable interest rate market. The amount
and timing of future issuances and redemptions will depend upon
market conditions and BGE's actual capital requirements.
The Constellation Companies' capital requirements are
discussed below in the section titled "Diversified Businesses
Capital Requirements - Debt and Liquidity." The Constellation
Companies plan to meet their capital requirements with a combi-
nation of debt and internal generation of cash from their opera-
tions. Additionally, from time to time, BGE may make loans to
Constellation Holdings, Inc., or contribute equity to enhance the
capital structure of Constellation Holdings, Inc.
Diversified Businesses Capital Requirements
Debt and Liquidity
The Constellation Companies intend to meet capital requirements
by refinancing debt as it comes due and through internally
generated cash. These internal sources include cash that may be
generated from operations, sale of assets, and cash generated by
tax benefits earned by the Constellation Companies. In the event
the Constellation Companies can obtain reasonable value for real
Response to Regulatory Change
Electric utilities presently face competition in the construction
of generating units to meet future load growth and in the sale of
electricity in the bulk power markets. Electric utilities also face
the future prospect of competition for electric sales to retail
customers. It is not possible to predict currently the ultimate
effect competition will have on BGE's earnings in future years.
In response to the competitive forces and regulatory changes, as
discussed in Part 1 of BGE's Reports on Form 10-K under the
headings Business or Competition, BGE from time to time will
consider various strategies designed to enhance its competitive
position and to increase its ability to adapt to and anticipate
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and Subsidiaries
estate properties, additional cash may become available through
the sale of projects (for additional information see the discussion
of the real estate business and market on page 31). The ability of
the Constellation Companies to sell or liquidate assets described
above will depend on market conditions, and no assurances can
be given that such sales or liquidations can be made. Also, to
provide additional liquidity to meet interim financial needs, CHI
has entered into a $50 million revolving credit agreement.
Investment Requirements
The investment requirements of the Constellation Companies
include its portion of equity funding to committed projects under
development, as well as net loans made to project partnerships.
Investment requirements for the years 1995 through 1997 reflect
the Constellation Companies' estimate of funding for ongoing
and anticipated projects and are subject to continuous review and
modification. Actual investment requirements may vary signifi-
cantly from the amounts on page 32 because of the type and
number of projects selected for development, the impact of
market conditions on those projects, the ability to obtain
financing, and the availability of internally generated cash. The
Constellation Companies have met their investment requirements
in the past through the internal generation of cash and through
borrowings from institutional lenders.
regulatory changes in its utility business. These strategies may
include internal restructurings involving the complete or partial
separation of its generation, transmission and distribution busi-
nesses, acquisitions of related or unrelated businesses, business
combinations, and additions to or dispositions of portions of its
franchised service territories. BGE may from time to time be
engaged in preliminary discussions, either internally or with
third parties, regarding one or more of these potential strategies.
No assurances can be given as to whether any potential trans-
action of the type described above may actually occur, or as to
the ultimate effect thereof on the financial condition or compet-
itive position of BGE.
33.The management of BGE is responsible for the information and
representations in the Company's financial statements. The
Company prepares the financial statements in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles based upon available
facts and circumstances and management's best estimates and
judgments of known conditions.
The Company maintains an accounting system and related
system of internal controls designed to provide reasonable
assurance that the financial records are accurate and that the
Company's assets are protected. The Company's staff of internal
auditors, which reports directly to the Chairman of the Board,
To the Shareholders of
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company
Report of Management
34.
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets
and statements of capitalization of Baltimore Gas and Electric
Company and Subsidiaries at December 31, 1994 and 1993, and
the related consolidated statements of income, cash flows,
common shareholders' equity, and income taxes for each of the
three years in the period ended December 31, 1994. These
financial statements are the responsibility of the Company's
Management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these
financial statements based on our audits.
We conducted our audits in accordance with generally
accepted auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about
whether the financial statements are free of material
misstatement. An audit includes examining, on a test basis,
evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial
statements. An audit also includes assessing the accounting prin-
ciples used and ificant estimates made by Management, as
well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation.
conducts periodic reviews to maintain the effectiveness of
internal control procedures.
Coopers & Lybrand L.L.P., independent auditors, audit the
financial statements and express their opinion about them. They
audit in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards.
The Audit Committee of the Board of Directors, which
consists of four outside Directors, meets periodically with
Management, internal auditors, and Coopers & Lybrand L.L.P. to
review the activities of each in discharging their responsibilities.
The internal audit staff and Coopers & Lybrand L.L.P. have free
access to the Audit Committee.
CHPorndenter Cushing
Charles W. Shivery
Chief Financial Officer
Christian H. Poindexter
Chairman of the Board
Report of Independent Auditors
We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our
opinion.
In our opinion, the financial statements referred to above
present fairly, in all material respects, the consolidated financial
position of Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and
Subsidiaries at December 31, 1994 and 1993, and the consoli-
dated results of their operations and their cash flows for each of
the three years in the period ended December 31, 1994 in
conformity with generally accepted accounting principles.
As discussed in Note 13 to the consolidated financial state-
ments, the Public Service Commission of Maryland is currently
reviewing the replacement energy costs resulting from the 1989-
1991 outages at the Company's nuclear power plant, and the
Company established in 1990 a reserve of $35 million for the
possible disallowance of replacement energy costs. The ultimate
outcome of the fuel rate proceedings, however, cannot be deter-
mined but may result in a disallowance in excess of the reserve
provided.
Coopers & Lybrand L.L.P.
Coopers & Lybrand L.L.P.
Baltimore, Maryland
January 20, 1995
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and SubsidiariesYear Ended December 31,
Revenues
Electric
Gas
Diversified businesses
Total revenues
Expenses Other Than Interest and Income Taxes
Electric fuel and purchased energy
Gas purchased for resale
Operations
Maintenance
Consolidated Statements of Income
Diversified businesses - selling, general, and administrative
Depreciation and amortization
Taxes other than income taxes
Total expenses other than interest and income taxes
Income from Operations
Other Income
Allowance for equity funds used during construction
Equity in earnings of Safe Harbor Water Power Corporation
Net other income and deductions
Total other income
Income Before Interest and Income Taxes
Interest Expense
Interest charges
Capitalized interest
Allowance for borrowed funds used during construction
Net interest expense
Income Before Income Taxes
Income Taxes
Net Income
Preferred and Preference Stock Dividends
Earnings Applicable to Common Stock
Average Shares of Common Stock Outstanding
Earnings Per Share of Common Stock
See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Certain prior-year amounts have been reclassified to conform to the current year's presentation.
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and Subsidiaries
1994
1993
(In thousands, except per share amounts)
$2,126,581
421,249
235,155
2,782,985
542,314
224,590
545,413
164,892
174,834
295,950
199,733
2,147,726
635,259
21,746
4,349
6,270
32,365
667,624
214,347
(12,427)
(11,766)
190,154
477,470
153,853
323,617
39,922
$ 283,695
147,100
$1.93
$2,112,147
433,163
196,075
2,741,385
534,628
242,685
574,073
181,208
143,654
253,913
194,832
2,124,993
616,392
14,492
4,243
1,575
20,310
636,702
212,971
(16,167)
(8,040)
188,764
447,938
138,072
309,866
41,839
$ 268,027
145,072
1992
$1.85
$1,965,532
400,399
193,605
2,559,536
556,184
214,103
537,593
172,248
131,580
229,515
183,004
2,024,227
535,309
13,892
4,267
3,973
22,132
557,441
211,712
(13,800)
(8,165)
189,747
367,694
103,347
264,347
42,247
$ 222,100
136,248
$1.63
35.At December 31,
Assets
Current Assets
Cash and cash equivalents
Accounts receivable (net of allowance for uncollectibles)
Fuel stocks
Materials and supplies
Prepaid taxes other than income taxes
Other
Total current assets
Investments and Other Assets
Real estate projects
Power generation systems
Financial investments
Nuclear decommissioning trust fund
Safe Harbor Water Power Corporation
Senior living facilities
Other
Total investments and other assets
Utility Plant
Plant in service
Electric
Gas
Common
36.
Total plant in service
Accumulated depreciation
Net plant in service
Construction work in progress
Nuclear fuel (net of amortization)
Plant held for future use
Net utility plant
Deferred Charges
Regulatory assets
Other
Total deferred charges
Total Assets
Consolidated Balance Sheets
See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
1994
$ 38,590
314,842
70,627
149,614
57,740
47,022
678,435
471,435
311,960
224,340
66,891
34,168
11,540
58,824
1,179,158
5,929,996
616,823
511,016
7,057,835
(2,305,372)
4,752,463
506,030
134,012
24,320
5,416,825
773,034
96,086
869,120
$8,143,538
(In thousands)
1993
$ 84,236
401,853
70,233
145,130
54,237
38,971
794,660
487,397
298,514
213,315
56,207
34,138
2,005
65,355
1,156,931
5,713,259
557,942
487,740
6,758,941
(2,161,984)
4,596,957
436,440
139,424
24,066
5,196,887
768,125
70,436
838,561
$7,987,039
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and SubsidiariesAt December 31,
Llabilities and Capitalization
Current Liabilities
Short-term borrowings
Current portions of long-term debt and preference stock
Accounts payable
Customer deposits
Accrued taxes
Accrued interest
Dividends declared
Accrued vacation costs
Other
Total current liabilities
Deferred Credits and Other Liabilities
Deferred income taxes
Deferred investment tax credits
Pension and postemployment benefits
Decommissioning of federal uranium enrichment facilities
Other
Total deferred credits and other liabilities
Capitalization
Consolidated Balance Sheets
Long-term debt
Preferred stock
Redeemable preference stock
Preference stock not subject to mandatory redemption
Common shareholders' equity
Total capitalization
Commitments, Guarantees, and Contingencies - See Note 13
Total Liabilities and Capitalization
See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and Subsidiaries
1994
$ 63,700
323,675
181,931
24,891
19,585
60,348
66,012
30,917
30,857
801,916
1,156,429
149,394
138,835
45,836
59,645
1,550,139
2,584,932
59,185
279,500
150,000
2,717,866
5,791,483
$8,143,538
(In thousands)
1993
44,516
195,534
22,345
20,623
58,541
63,966
35,546
38,716
479,787
1,067,611
157,426
183,043
46,858
56,974
1,511,912
2,823,144
59,185
342,500
150,000
2,620,511
5,995,340
$7,987,039
37.Year Ended December 31,
Cash Flows From Operating Activities
Net income
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
Adjustments to reconcile to net cash provided by operating activities
Depreciation and amortization
Deferred income taxes
Investment tax credit adjustments
Deferred fuel costs
Accrued pension and postemployment benefits
Allowance for equity funds used during construction
Equity in earnings of affiliates and joint ventures (net)
Changes in current assets other than sale of accounts receivable
Changes in current liabilities, other than short-term borrowings
Other
Net cash provided by operating activities
Cash Flows From Financing Activities
Proceeds from issuance of
Short-term borrowings (net)
Long-term debt
Preference stock
Common stock
Proceeds from sale of receivables
Reacquisition of long-term debt
Redemption of preference stock
Common stock dividends paid
Preferred and preference stock dividends paid
Other
Net cash used in financing activities
Cash Flows From Investing Activities
Utility construction expenditures (including AFC)
Allowance for equity funds used during construction
Nuclear fuel expenditures
Deferred nuclear expenditures
Deferred energy conservation expenditures
Contributions to nuclear decommissioning trust fund
Purchases of marketable equity securities
38.
Sales of marketable equity securities
Other financial investments
Real estate projects
Power generation systems
Other
Net cash used in investing activities
Net Increase (Decrease) in Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and Cash Equivalents at Beginning of Year
Cash and Cash Equivalents at End of Year
Other Cash Flow Information
Cash paid during the year for:
Interest (net of amounts capitalized)
Income taxes
See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Certain prior-year amounts have been reclassified to conform to the current year's presentation.
1994
$ 323,617
351,064
79,278
(8,192)
11,461
(41,113)
(21,746)
(20,225)
(10,536)
(24,447)
7,153
646,314
63,700
207,169
(483,059)
21,746
(42,089)
(8,393)
(40,440)
(9,780)
(52,099)
40,585
2,469
14,926
(1,116)
(3,650)
(560,900)
(45,646)
84,236
$ 38,590
1993
(In thousands)
$ 184,441
$ 112,923
$ 309,866
33,869
70,000
(240,853) (1,012,514)
(4,406)
(144,310)
(220,152)
(211,137)
(39,950)
(42,425)
(437)
(7,094)
(131,060)
(36,875)
314,027
53,057
$
(8,444)
51,445
(25,276)
(14,492)
(4,655)
(37,252)
71,153
(6,643)
702,786
(11,900)
1,206,350
128,776
57,379
(477,878)
14,492
(47,329)
(13,791)
(32,909)
(9,699)
(46,820)
33,754
19,589
(30,330)
(26,841)
8,965
(608.797)
57,114
27,122
84,236
$ 183,266
$ 126,034
1992
$ 264,347
273,549
26,914
(8,854)
105,430
(13,892)
(11,525)
(26,206)
(9,614)
(31,005)
569,144
(139,600)
603,400
355,759
(687,052)
(2,924)
(189,180)
(42,300)
(399)
(102,296)
(389,416)
13,892
(39,486)
(15,809)
(19,918)
(8,900)
(49,003)
56,690
44,929
(23,385)
(31,483)
4,746
(457,143)
9,705
17,417
$ 27,122
$ 183.209
$ 87.693
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and SubsidiariesConsolidated Statements of Common Shareholders' Equity
Years Ended December 31, 1994, 1993, and 1992
Balance at December 31, 1991
Net income
Dividends declared
Preferred and preference stock
Common stock ($1.43 per share)
Common stock issued
Other
Balance at December 31, 1992
Net income
Dividends declared
Preferred and preference stock
Common stock ($1.47 per share)
Common stock issued
Other
Pension liability adjustment
Deferred taxes on pension liability adjustment
Balance at December 31, 1993
Net income
Dividends declared
Preferred and preference stock
Common stock ($1.51 per share)
Common stock issued
Other
Net unrealized loss on securities
Deferred taxes on net unrealized loss on securities
Pension liability adjustment
Deferred taxes on pension liability adjustment
Balance at December 31, 1994
See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and Subsidiaries
Common Stock
Shares Amount
126,690 $ 979,211
17,098 356,230
(4)
(439)
143,784 1,335,002
2,250
57,379
(917)
146,034 1,391,464
1,493 33,869
45
147,527 $1,425,378
Unrealized
Loss on
Available
Pension
Retained
For Sale
Liability
Earnings Securities Adjustment
(In thousands)
$1,174,095
264,347
(42,247)
(196,601)
43
1,199,637
309,866
(41,839)
(213,407)
(3,117)
1,251,140
323,617
(39,922)
(222,180)
(5,609)
1,963
Total
Amount
$2,153,306
264,347
(42,247)
(196,601)
356,230
(396)
2,534,639
309,866
(41,839)
(213,407)
57,379
(4,034)
(33,990)
11,897
(33,990)
11,897
(22,093) 2,620,511
323,617
(39,922)
(222,180)
33,869
45
(5,609)
1,963
8,573
(3,001)
8,573
(3,001)
$1,312,655 $(3,646) $(16,521) $2,717,866
39.At December 31,
Long-Term Debt
First Refunding Mortgage Bonds of BGE
94% Series, due October 15, 1995
54% Series, due April 15, 1996
Consolidated Statements of Capitalization
6%% Series, due August 1, 1997
7% Series, due December 15, 1998
Floating rate series, due April 15, 1999
8.40% Series, due October 15, 1999
5%% Series, due July 15, 2000
7%% Series, due April 15, 2001
8%% Series, due August 15, 2001
7%% Series, due January 1, 2002
74% Series, due July 1, 2002
51% Installment Series, due July 15, 2002
6½% Series, due February 15, 2003
6%% Series, due July 1, 2003
5%% Series, due April 15, 2004
6.80% Series, due September 15, 2004
74% Series, due January 15, 2007
6%% Series, due March 15, 2008
6.90% Installment Series, due September 15, 2009
7½% Series, due March 1, 2023
74% Series, due April 15, 2023
Total First Refunding Mortgage Bonds
Other long-term debt of BGE
40.
Medium-term notes, Series A
Medium-term notes, Series B
Medium-term notes, Series C
Pollution control loan, due July 1, 2011
Port facilities loan, due June 1, 2013
Adjustable rate pollution control loan, due July 1, 2014
5.55% Pollution control revenue refunding loan, due July 15, 2014
Economic development loan, due December 1, 2018
6.00% Pollution control revenue refunding loan, due April 1, 2024
Total other long-term debt of BGE
Long-term debt of Constellation Companies
Mortgage and construction loans and other collateralized notes
7.67%, due October 1, 1995
Variable rates, due through 2009
7.73%, due March 15, 2009
Unsecured notes
Total long-term debt of Constellation Companies
Unamortized discount and premium
Current portion of long-term debt
Total long-term debt
See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
1994
$188,014
26,454
24,935
125,000
96,225
125,000
122,430
49,957
124,850
11,650
(In thousands)
124,947
124,925
125,000
125,000
125,000
124,998
100,000
1,744,385
10,500
100,000
173,050
36,000
48,000
20,000
47,000
35,000
75,000
544,550
13,000
116,613
6,152
440,000
575,765
(17,593)
(262,175)
2,584,932
1993
$ 200,000
26,585
24,957
28,638
100,000
125,000
59,911
124,980
49,999
125,000
12,080
125,000
125,000
125,000
20,000
125,000
125,000
55,000
124,998
100,000
1,802,148
23,500
100,000
173,050
36,000
48,000
20,000
47,000
35,000
482,550
151,251
6,465
440,000
597,716
(17,754)
(41,516)
2,823,144
continued on page 41
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and SubsidiariesAt December 31,
Consolidated Statements of Capitalization
Preferred Stock
Cumulative, $100 par value, 1,000,000 shares authorized
share
Series B, 4½%, 222,921 shares outstanding, callable at $110 per
Series C, 4%, 68,928 shares outstanding, callable at $105 per share
Series D, 5.40%, 300,000 shares outstanding, callable at $101 per share
Total preferred stock
Preference Stock
Cumulative, $100 par value, 6,500,000 shares authorized
Redeemable preference stock
7.50%, 1986 Series, 455,000 and 470,000 shares outstanding. Callable
at $105 per share prior to October 1, 1996 and at lesser amounts thereafter
6.75%, 1987 Series, 455,000 and 485,000 shares outstanding. Callable at
$104.50 per share prior to April 1, 1997 and at lesser amounts thereafter
6.95%, 1987 Series, 500,000 shares outstanding
7.80%, 1989 Series, 500,000 shares outstanding
8.25%, 1989 Series, 500,000 shares outstanding
8.625%, 1990 Series, 650,000 shares outstanding
7.85%, 1991 Series, 350,000 shares outstanding
Current portion of redeemable preference stock
Total redeemable preference stock
Preference stock not subject to mandatory redemption
7.78%, 1973 Series, 200,000 shares outstanding, callable at $101 per share
7.125%, 1993 Series, 400,000 shares outstanding, not callable prior to July 1, 2003
6.97%, 1993 Series, 500,000 shares outstanding, not callable prior to October 1, 2003
6.70%, 1993 Series, 400,000 shares outstanding, not callable prior to January 1, 2004
Total preference stock not subject to mandatory redemption
Common Shareholders' Equity
Common stock without par value, 175,000,000 shares authorized; 147,527,114 and 146,034,014
shares issued and outstanding at December 31, 1994 and 1993, respectively. (At December 31,
1994, 166,893 shares were reserved for the Employee Savings Plan and 3,277,655 shares
were reserved for the Dividend Reinvestment and Stock Purchase Plan.)
Retained earnings
Unrealized loss on available for sale securities
Pension liability adjustment
Total common shareholders' equity
Total Capitalization
See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and Subsidiaries
1994
$ 22,292
6,893
30,000
59,185
45,500
45,500
50,000
50,000
50,000
65,000
35,000
(61,500)
279,500
20,000
40,000
50,000
40,000
150,000
1,425,378
1,312,655
(3,646)
(16,521)
2,717,866
$5,791,483
(In thousands)
1993
$ 22,292
6,893
30,000
59,185
47,000
48,500
50,000
50,000
50,000
65,000
35,000
(3,000)
342,500
20,000
40,000
50,000
40,000
150,000
1,391,464
1,251,140
(22,093)
2,620,511
$5,995,340
41.Year Ended December 31,
Income Taxes
Current
Deferred
Change in tax effect of temporary differences
Change in income taxes recoverable through future rates
Deferred taxes credited (charged) to shareholders' equity
Deferred taxes charged to expense
Effect on deferred taxes of enacted change in federal corporate income tax rate
Increase in deferred tax liability
Income taxes recoverable through future rates
Deferred taxes charged to expense
Consolidated Statements of Income Taxes
Investment tax credit adjustments
Income taxes per Consolidated Statements of Income
Reconciliation of Income Taxes Computed at Statutory
Federal Rate to Total Income Taxes
Income before income taxes
Statutory federal income tax rate
Income taxes computed at statutory federal rate
Increases (decreases) in income taxes due to
Depreciation differences not normalized on regulated activities
Allowance for equity funds used during construction
Amortization of deferred investment tax credits
Tax credits flowed through to income
Change in federal corporate income tax rate charged to expense
Amortization of deferred tax rate differential on regulated activities
Other
At December 31,
Deferred Income Taxes
Deferred tax liabilities
42.
Total income taxes
Effective federal income tax rate
Accelerated depreciation
Allowance for funds used during construction
Income taxes recoverable through future rates
Deferred termination and postemployment costs
Deferred fuel costs
Deferred tax assets
Leveraged leases
Percentage repair allowance
Other
Total deferred tax liabilities
Alternative minimum tax
Accrued pension and postemployment benefit costs
Deferred investment tax credits
Other
Total deferred tax assets
Deferred income taxes per Consolidated Balance Sheets
See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
1994
$ 82,767
88,896
(8,580)
(1,038)
79,278
(8,192)
$153,853
$477,470
35%
167,115
9,791
(7,611)
(8,164)
(1,754)
(1,885)
(3,639)
$153,853
32.2%
1993
(Dollar amounts in thousands)
$ 840,376
208,726
93,952
53,749
41,507
31,948
36,630
148,064
1,454,952
$ 93,459
71,074
51,163
52,288
123,998
298,523
$1,156,429
63,972
(30,086)
11,897
45,783
20,105
(12,831)
7,274
(8,444)
$138,072
$447,938
35%
156,778
9,253
(5,072)
(8,444)
(9,736)
7,274
(5,789)
(6,192)
$138,072
30.8%
$ 85,287
1994
(Dollar amounts in thousands)
44,975
(18,061)
1992
26,914
(8,854)
$103,347
$367,694
34%
125,016
8,955
(4,723)
(8,854)
(804)
(7,365)
(8,878)
$103,347
1993
$ 789,165
202,490
90,950
55,890
45,518
32,613
35,431
125,850
1,377,907
73,203
64,065
55,099
117,929
310,296
$1,067,611
28.1%
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and SubsidiariesNotes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Note 1. Significant Accounting Policles
Nature of the Business
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company (BGE) and Subsidiaries
(collectively, the Company) is primarily an electric and gas utility
serving a territory which encompasses Baltimore City and all or
part of nine Central Maryland counties. The Company is also
engaged in diversified businesses as described further in Note 3.
Principles of Consolidation
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of
BGE and all subsidiaries in which BGE owns directly or indi-
rectly a majority of the voting stock. Intercompany balances and
transactions have been eliminated in consolidation. Under this
policy, the accounts of Constellation Holdings, Inc. and its
subsidiaries (collectively, the Constellation Companies), BGE
Home Products & Services, Inc. (HPS) and BNG, Inc. are
consolidated in the financial statements, and Safe Harbor Water
Power Corporation is reported under the equity method.
Corporate joint ventures, partnerships, and affiliated companies
in which a 20% to 50% voting interest is held are accounted for
under the equity method, unless control is evident, in which case
the entity is consolidated. Investments in power generation
systems and certain financial investments in which less than a
20% voting interest is held are accounted for under the cost
method, unless significant influence is exercised over the
entity, in which case the investment is accounted for under the
equity method.
Regulation of Utility Operations
BGE's utility operations are subject to regulation by the Public
Service Commission of Maryland (PSC). The accounting policies
and practices used in the determination of service rates are also
generally used for financial reporting purposes in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles for regulated
industries. See Note 5.
Utility Revenues
BGE recognizes utility revenues as service is rendered to customers.
Fuel and Purchased Energy Costs
Subject to the approval of the PSC, the cost of fuel used in gener-
ating electricity, net of revenues from interchange sales, and the
cost of gas sold may be recovered through zero-based electric
fuel rate (see Note 13) and purchased gas adjustment clauses,
respectively. The difference between actual fuel costs and fuel
revenues is deferred on the balance sheet to be recovered from or
refunded to customers in future periods.
The electric fuel rate formula is based upon the latest
twenty-four-month generation mix and the latest three-month
average fuel cost for each generating unit. The fuel rate does not
change unless the calculated rate is more than 5% above or
below the rate then in effect.
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and Subsidiaries
The purchased gas adjustment is based on recent annual
volumes of gas and the related current prices charged by BGE's
gas suppliers. Any deferred underrecoveries or overrecoveries of
purchased gas costs for the twelve months ended November 30
each year are charged or credited to customers over the ensuing
calendar year.
Income Taxes
The deferred tax liability represents the tax effect of temporary
differences between the financial statement and tax bases of
assets and liabilities. It is measured using presently enacted tax
rates. The portion of BGE's deferred tax liability applicable to
utility operations which has not been reflected in current service
rates represents income taxes recoverable through future rates. It
has been recorded as a regulatory asset on the balance sheet.
Deferred income tax expense represents the net change in the
deferred tax liability and regulatory asset during the year,
exclusive of amounts charged or credited to common share-
holders' equity.
Current tax expense consists solely of regular tax. In certain
prior years, tax expense included an alternative minimum tax
(AMT) that can be carried forward indefinitely as tax credits to
future years in which the regular tax liability exceeds the AMT
liability. As of December 31, 1994, this carryforward totaled
$71.1 million.
The investment tax credit (ITC) associated with BGE's regu-
lated utility operations has been deferred and is amortized to
income ratably over the lives of the subject property, ITC and
other tax credits associated with nonregulated diversified busi-
nesses other than leveraged leases are flowed through to income.
BGE's utility revenue from system sales is subject to the
Maryland public service company franchise tax in lieu of a state
income tax. The franchise tax is included in taxes other than
income taxes in the Consolidated Statements of Income.
Inventory Valuation
Fuel stocks and materials and supplies are generally stated at
average cost.
Real Estate Projects
Real estate projects consist of the Constellation Companies'
investment in rental and operating properties and properties
under development. Rental and operating properties are held for
investment. Properties under development are held for future
development and sale. Costs incurred in the acquisition and
active development of such properties are capitalized. Rental and
operating properties and properties under development are stated
at cost unless the amount invested exceeds the amounts expected
to be recovered through operations and sales. In these cases,
the projects are written down to the amount estimated to be
recoverable.
43.Investments and Other Assets
The Company adopted Statement of Financial Accounting
Standards No. 115 (Statement No. 115), "Accounting for Certain
Investments in Debt and Equity Securities," effective January 1,
1994. Securities subject to the requirements of Statement No. 115
are reported at fair value as of December 31, 1994. Certain of
Constellation Companies' marketable equity securities totaling
$24.3 million are classified as trading securities. These securities
are reported as other current assets, and unrealized gains and
losses are included in diversified businesses revenues. The
investments comprising the nuclear decommissioning trust fund
and certain marketable equity securities of CHI are classified as
available for sale. Unrealized gains and losses on these securities,
as well as CHI's portion of unrealized gains and losses on secu-
rities of equity-method investees, are recorded in shareholders'
equity. At December 31, 1993 marketable equity securities are
stated at the lower of cost or market value.
Utility Plant, Depreciation and Amortization,
and Decommissioning
Utility plant is stated at original cost, which includes material,
labor, and, where applicable, construction overhead costs and an
allowance for funds used during construction. Additions to utility
plant and replacements of units of property are capitalized to
utility plant accounts. Utility plant retired or otherwise disposed
of is charged to accumulated depreciation. Maintenance and
repairs of property and replacements of items of property deter-
mined to be less than a unit of property are charged to mainte-
nance expense.
Depreciation is generally computed using composite
straight-line rates applied to the average investment in classes of
depreciable property. Vehicles are depreciated based on their esti-
mated useful lives. Effective in 1995, BGE revised its utility
plant depreciation rates to reflect the results of a detailed depreci-
ation study. The new rates are expected to result in an increase in
depreciation accruals of approximately $21 million annually.
Depreciation expense for 1994 includes the write-off of
certain costs at BGE's Perryman site. Initially, BGE had planned
to build two combined cycle generating units at this site. How-
ever, due to significant changes in the environment in which util-
ities operate, BGE now has no plans to construct the second
combined cycle generating unit. Accordingly, during the third
quarter of 1994, BGE wrote off $15.7 million of the costs asso-
ciated with that second combined cycle unit. This write-off re-
duced after-tax earnings during 1994 by $11.0 million or 7 cents
per share. Also in 1994, BGE reclassified the amortization of
deferred energy conservation expenditures and deferred nuclear
expenditures from operations expense to depreciation and amorti-
zation expense. Prior-year amounts have been reclassified to
conform with the current year's presentation.
BGE owns an undivided interest in the Keystone and
Conemaugh electric generating plants located in western
Pennsylvania, as well as in the transmission line which transports
the plants' output to the joint owners' service territories. BGE's
44.
ownership interest in these plants is 20.99% and 10.56%, respec.
tively, and represents a net investment of $143 million as of
December 31, 1994. Financing and accounting for these prop-
erties are the same as for wholly owned utility plant.
Nuclear fuel expenditures are amortized as a component of
actual fuel costs based on the energy produced over the life of
the fuel. Fees for the future disposal of spent fuel are paid quar-
terly to the Department of Energy and are accrued based on the
kilowatt-hours of electricity sold. Nuclear fuel expenses are
subject to recovery through the electric fuel rate.
Nuclear decommissioning costs are accrued by and recovered
through a sinking fund methodology. In its April 1993 rate order,
the PSC granted BGE revenue to accumulate a decommissioning
reserve of $336 million in 1992 dollars by the end of Calvert
Cliffs' service life in 2016, adjusted to reflect expected inflation,
to decommission the radioactive portion of the plant. The total
decommissioning reserve of $109.8 million and $93.4 million at
December 31, 1994 and 1993, respectively, is included in accu-
mulated depreciation in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. In
accordance with Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) regula-
tions, BGE has esta hed an external decommissioning trust to
which a portion of accrued decommissioning costs have been
contributed.
The NRC requires utilities to provide financial assurance that
they will accumulate sufficient funds to pay for the cost of
nuclear decommissioning based upon either a generic NRC
formula or a facility-specific decommissioning cost estimate. The
Company completed a facility-specific study in 1995 which
generated an estimate of $521 million in 1993 dollars to decom-
mission the radioactive portion of the plant. The Company plans
to use the facility-specific cost estimate as a basis for recording
decommissioning expense in 1995, for funding these costs, and
providing the requisite financial assurance.
Allowance for Funds Used During Construction
and Capitalized Interest
The allowance for funds used during construction (AFC) is an
accounting procedure which capitalizes the cost of funds used to
finance utility construction projects as part of utility plant on the
balance sheet, crediting the cost as a noncash item on the income
statement. The cost of borrowed and equity funds is segregated
between interest expense and other income, respectively. BGE
recovers the capitalized AFC and a return thereon after the
related utility plant is placed in service and included in depre-
ciable assets and rate base.
Prior to April 23, 1993, the Company accrued AFC at a pre-
tax rate of 9.94%, compounded annually. Effective April 24,
1993, a rate order of the PSC reduced the pre-tax AFC rate to
9.40%, compounded annually.
The Constellation Companies capitalize interest on qualifying
real estate and power generation development projects. BGE
capitalizes interest on carrying charges accrued on certain
deferred fuel costs as discussed in Note 5.
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and SubsidiariesLong-Term Debt
The discount or premium and expense of issuance associated
with long-term debt are deferred and amortized over the original
lives of the respective debt issues. Gains and losses on the reac-
quisition of debt are amortized over the remaining original lives
of the issuances.
Cash Flows
For the purpose of reporting cash flows, highly liquid invest-
Note 2. Segment Information
Electric
Nonaffiliated revenues
Affiliated revenues
Total revenues
Income from operations
Depreciation and amortization
Construction expenditures (including AFC)
Identifiable assets at December 31
Gas
Total revenues (nonaffilated)
Income from operations
Depreciation and amortization
Construction expenditures (including AFC)
Identifiable assets at December 31
Diversified Businesses
Nonaffiliated revenues
Affiliated revenues
Total revenues
Income from operations
Depreciation and amortization
Identifiable assets at December 31
Total
Nonaffiliated revenues
Affiliated revenues
Intercompany eliminations
Total revenues
Income from operations
Depreciation and amortization
Construction expenditures (including AFC)
Identifiable assets at December 31
Other assets at December 31
Total assets at December 31
Certain prior-year amounts have been reclassified to conform to the current year's presentation.
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and Subsidiaries
ments purchased with a maturity of three months or less are
considered to be cash equivalents.
Accounting Standards Issued
The Financial Accounting Standards Board has issued Statement
of Financial Accounting Standards Nos. 114 and 118, regarding
accounting for impairment of a loan, effective January 1, 1995.
Ado of these statements is not expected to have a material
impact on the Company's financial statements.
1994
$2,126,581
840
2,127,421
539,739
252,273
406,928
6,123,194
$ 421,249
35,205
32,478
76,131
733,624
$ 235,155
15,649
250,804
60,315
11,199
1,158,162
$2,782,985
16,489
(16,489)
2,782,985
635,259
295,950
483,059
8,014,980
128,558
8,143,538
1993
(In thousands)
$2,112,147
2,112,147
534,185
219,735
419,519
6,012,225
$ 433,163
34,738
23,875
58,359
690,783
$ 196,075
6,825
202,900
47,469
10,303
1,166,997
$2,741,385
6,825
(6,825)
2,741,385
616,392
253,913
477,878
7,870,005
117,034
7,987,039
1992
$1,965,532
1,965,532
438,057
197,853
346,728
5,494,354
$ 400,399
40,598
21,513
42,688
575,513
$ 193,605
6,468
200,073
56,654
10,149
1,090,667
$2,559,536
6,468
(6,468)
2,559,536
535,309
229,515
389,416
7,160,534
213,823
7,374,357
45.Note 3. Subsidiary Information
Diversified businesses consist of the operations of Constellation
Holdings, Inc. and its subsidiaries, BGE Home Products &
Services, Inc. (HPS), and BNG, Inc. Diversified businesses'
operating expenses have been reclassified as diversified busi-
nesses-selling, general, and administrative expense in the consoli-
dated statements of income. Prior-year amounts have been
reclassified to conform with the current year's presentation.
Constellation Holdings, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary,
holds all of the stock of three other subsidiaries, Constellation
Real Estate Group, Inc., Constellation Energy, Inc., and
Constellation Investments, Inc. These companies are engaged in
real estate development and ownership of senior living facilities;
development, ownership, and operation of power generation
systems; and financial investments, respectively.
Effective July 1, 1994, BGE formed a wholly owned sub-
Income Statements
Revenues
Real estate projects
Power generation systems
Financial investments
46.
Total revenues
Expenses other than interest and income taxes
Income from operations
Interest expense
Capitalized interest
Income tax benefit (expense)
Net income
Contribution to the Company's earnings per share of common stock
Balance Sheets
Current assets
Noncurrent assets
Total assets
Current liabilities
Noncurrent liabilities
Shareholder's equity
Total liabilities and shareholder's equity
sidiary, BGE Home Products & Services, Inc., which
engages in
the businesses of appliance and consumer electronics sales and
service; heating, ventilation, and air conditioning system sales,
installation and service; and home improvements and services.
BNG, Inc. is a wholly owned subsidiary which engages in
natural gas brokering.
BGE's investment in Safe Harbor Water Power Corporation,
a producer of hydroelectric power, represents two-thirds of Safe
Harbor's total capital stock, including one-half of the voting
stock, and a two-thirds interest in its retained earnings.
The following is condensed financial information for
Constellation Holdings, Inc, and its subsidiaries. The condensed
financial information does not reflect the elimination of inter-
company balances or transactions which are eliminated in the
Company's consolidated financial statements.
1994
1993
(In thousands, except per share amounts)
$ 106,915
41,301
12,126
160,342
107,267
53,075
(45,782)
10,776
(4,305)
$ 13,764
$
.09
53,034
1,055,056
$1,108,090
$ 70,670
718,846
318,574
$1,108,090
$ 77,598
24,971
21,195
$
$
$
123,764
80,707
43,057
(47,845)
14,702
1,984
11,898
.08
54,039
1,036,507
$1,090,546
$ 24,201
759,048
307,297
$1,090,546
$
$
$
1992
$
76,582
28,084
21,485
126,151
77,154
48.997
(43,903)
13,800
(3,637)
15,257
.11
29,899
990,273
$1,020,172
$ 113,404
611,370
295,398
$1,020,172
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and SubsidiariesNote 4. Real Estate Projects and Financial Investments
Real estate projects consist of the following investments held by
the Constellation Companies:
At December 31.
Properties under development
Rental and operating properties
(net of accumulated
depreciation)
Other real estate ventures
Total
Insurance companies
Marketable equity securities
Financial limited partnerships
Leveraged leases
Other securities
Total
Note 5. Regulatory Assets
Income taxes recoverable
through future rates
Deferred fuel costs
Deferred nuclear expenditures
Deferred termination
benefit costs
Deferred postemployment
benefit costs
Deferred cost of
Financial investments consist of the following investments
held by the Constellation Companies:
At December 31,
decommissioning federal
1994
uranium enrichment facilities
Deferred energy conservation
expenditures
Deferred environmental costs
Other
Total
(In thousands)
$267,483
203,000
952
$471,435
1994
$ 87,700
51,175
48,014
37,451
(In thousands)
$224,340
Certain utility expenses and credits normally reflected in income
are deferred on the balance sheet as regulatory assets and liabil-
ities and are recognized in income as the related amounts are
included in service rates and recovered from or refunded to
customers in utility revenues. The following table sets forth
BGE's regulatory assets.
At December 31,
1994
1993
$249,473
$268,436
118,591
90,937
79,979
73,591
237,194
730
$487,397
52,748
45,534
35,015
8,203
$773,034
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and Subsidiaries
(In thousands)
1993
$ 83,275
42,681
44,903
38,669
3,787
$213,315
1993
$259,856
130,052
86,726
96,793
62,892
49,562
38,655
32,966
10,623
$768,125
The Constellation Companies' marketable equity securities
and the investments comprising the nuclear decommissioning
trust fund are classified as available for sale. The fair value and
gross unrealized gains and losses for available for sale securities,
exclusive of $3.2 million of unrealized net losses on securities of
equity-method investees, are as follows:
At December 31, 1994
Marketable equity securities
U.S. government agency
State municipal bonds
Total
Less than 1 year
1-5 years
5-10 years
More than 10 years
Total
Contractual maturities of debt securities:
Fair
Value
$ 51,175
5,102
58,034
$114,311
Electric
Unrealized Unrealized
Gains
Loss
(In thousands)
$1,276
Costs deferred
Reserve for possible
disallowance of replacement
energy costs (see Note 13)
Net electric
Gas
Total
929
$2,205
Gross realized gains and losses on available for sale securities
totaled $1.1 million and $3.1 million, respectively, in 1994. Net.
realized gains from financial investments totaled $6.5 million in
1993 and $9.8 million in 1992.
Income taxes recoverable through future rates represent prin-
cipally the tax effect of depreciation differences not normalized
and the allowance for equity funds used during construction,
offset by unamortized deferred tax rate differentials and deferred
taxes on deferred ITC. These amounts are amortized as the
related temporary differences reverse. See Note 1 for a further
discussion of income taxes.
Deferred fuel costs represent the difference between actual
fuel costs and the fuel rate revenues under BGE's fuel clauses
(see Note 1). Deferred fuel costs are reduced as they are collected
from customers.
$1,859
113
2,599
$4,571
The underrecovered costs deferred under the fuel clauses were
as follows:
At December 31.
(In thousands)
$
1994
13,855
46,010
4,765
$64,630
$152,815
(35,000)
117,815
776
$118,591
(in thousands)
1993
$155,901
(35,000)
120,901
9,151
$130,052
47.Deferred nuclear expenditures represent the net unamortized
balance of certain operations and maintenance costs which are
being amortized over the remaining life of the Calvert Cliffs
Nuclear Power Plant in accordance with orders of the PSC.
These expenditures consist of costs incurred from 1979 through
1982 for inspecting and repairing seismic pipe supports, expendi-
tures incurred from 1989 through 1994 associated with nonre-
curring phases of certain nuclear operations projects, and
expenditures incurred during 1990 for investigating leaks in the
pressurizer heater sleeves.
Deferred termination benefit costs represent the net unamor-
tized balance of the cost of certain termination benefits (see Note
7) applicable to BGE's regulated operations. These costs are
being amortized over a five-year period in accordance with rate
actions of the PSC.
Deferred postemployment benefit costs represent the excess of
such costs recognized in accordance with Statements of Financial
Accounting Standards No. 106 and No. 112 over the amounts
reflected in utility rates. These costs will be amortized over a 15-
year period beginning in 1998 (see Note 6).
Deferred cost of decommissioning federal uranium enrich-
ment facilities represents the unamortized portion of BGE's
required contributions to a fund for decommissioning and decon-
taminating the Department of Energy's (DOE) uranium enrich-
ment facilities. The Energy Policy Act of 1992 requires domestic
utilities to make such contributions, which are generally payable
Note 6. Pension and Postemployment Benefits
Pension Benefits
The Company sponsors several noncontributory defined benefit
pension plans, the largest of which (the Pension Plan) covers
substantially all BGE employees and certain employees of the
Constellation Companies and HPS. The other plans, which are
not material in amount, provide supplemental benefits to certain
non-employee directors and key employees. Benefits under the
plans are generally based on age, years of service, and compen-
sation levels.
Prior service cost associated with retroactive plan amend-
ments is amortized on a straight-line basis over the average
remaining service period of active employees.
The Company's funding policy is to contribute at least the
48.
over a 15-year period with escalation for inflation and are based
upon the amount of uranium enriched by DOE for each utility.
These costs are being amortized over the contribution period as a
cost of fuel.
Deferred energy conservation expenditures represent the net
unamortized balance of certain operations costs which are being
amortized over five years in accordance with orders of the PSC.
These expenditures consist of labor, materials, and indirect costs
associated with the conservation programs approved by the PSC.
Deferred environmental costs represent the estimated costs of
investigating contamination and performing certain remediation
activities at contaminated Company-owned sites (see Note 13).
These costs are generally amortized over the estimated term of
the remediation process.
Electric deferred fuel costs in excess of $72.8 million are
excluded from rate base by the PSC for ratemaking purposes.
Effective April 24, 1993, BGE has been authorized by the PSC to
accrue carrying charges on deferred fuel costs in excess of $72.8
million, net of related deferred income taxes. These carrying
charges are accrued prospectively at the 9.40% authorized rate of
return. The income effect of the equity funds portion of the
carrying charges is being deferred until such amounts are
recovered in utility service rates subsequent to the completion of
the fuel rate proceeding examining the 1989-1991 outages at
Calvert Cliffs Nuclear Power Plant as discussed in Note 13.
minimum amount required under Internal Revenue Service regu-
lations using the projected unit credit cost method. Plan assets at
December 31, 1994 consisted primarily of marketable fixed
income and equity securities, group annuity contracts, and
short-term investments.
The tables on page 49 set forth the combined funded status of
the plans and the composition of total net pension cost. At
December 31, 1994 and 1993, the accumulated pension oblig-
ation was greater than the fair value of the Pension Plan's assets.
As a result, the Company recorded an additional pension liability,
a portion of which was charged to shareholders' equity.
Net pension cost shown below does not include the cost of
termination benefits described in Note 7.
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and SubsidiariesAt December 31,
Vested benefit obligation
Nonvested benefit obligation
Accumulated benefit obligation
Projected benefits related to increase in future compensation levels
Projected benefit obligation
Plan assets at fair value
Projected benefit obligation less plan assets
Unrecognized prior service cost
Unrecognized net loss
Pension liability adjustment
Unamortized net asset from adoption of FASB Statement No. 87
Accrued pension liability
Year Ended December 31,
Components of net pension cost
Service cost-benefits earned during the period
Interest cost on projected benefit obligation
Actual return on plan assets
Net amortization and deferral
Total net pension cost
Amount capitalized as construction cost
Amount charged to expense
The Company also sponsors a defined contribution savings plan
covering all eligible BGE employees and certain employees of the
Constellation Companies and HPS. Under this plan, the Company
makes contributions on behalf of participants. Company
contributions to this plan totaled $8.7 million, $9.0 million,
and $14.8 million in 1994, 1993, and 1992, respectively.
Postretirement Benefits
The Company sponsors defined benefit postretirement health
care and life insurance plans which cover substantially all BGE
employees and certain employees of the Constellation
Companies and HPS. Benefits under the plans are generally
based on age, years of service, and pension benefit levels. The
postretirement benefit (PRB) plans are unfunded. Substantially
all of the health care plans are contributory, and participant
contributions for employees who retire after June 30, 1992 are
based on age and years of service. Retiree contributions increase
commensurate with the expected increase in medical costs. The
postretirement life insurance plan is noncontributory.
Effective January 1, 1993, the Company adopted Statement of
Financial Accounting Standards No. 106, which requires a
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and Subsidiaries
1994
$15,015
58,723
7,932
(60,071)
21,599
(2,578)
$19,021
1994
(In thousands)
$622,445
8,838
631,283
82,815
714,098
(614,284)
99,814
(23,863)
(112,546)
52,177
1,586
$ 17,168
1993
(In thousands)
$11,645
51,183
(56,225)
6,591
13,194
(1,800)
$11,394
1993
$677,069
11,359
688,428
109,161
797,589
(605,629)
191,960
(21,252)
(148,450)
58,553
1,812
$ 82,623
1992
$11,771
47,355
(33,685)
(12,257)
13,184
(1,839)
$11,345
change in the method of accounting for postretirement benefits
other than pensions from the pay-as-you-go method used prior to
1993 to the accrual method. The transition obligation existing at
the beginning of 1993 is being amortized over a 20-year period.
In April 1993, the PSC issued a rate order authorizing BGE to
recognize in operating expense one-half of the annual increase in
PRB costs applicable to regulated operations as a result of the
adoption of Statement No. 106 and to defer the remainder of the
annual increase in these costs for inclusion in BGE's next base
rate proceeding. In accordance with the PSC's Order, the increase
in annual PRB costs applicable to regulated operations for the
period January through April 1993, net of amounts capitalized as
construction cost, has been deferred. This amount, which totaled
$5.7 million, as well as all amounts to be deferred prior to
completion of BGE's next base rate proceeding, will be amor-
tized over a 15-year period beginning in 1998 in accordance with
the PSC's Order. This phase-in approach meets the guidelines
established by the Emerging Issues Task Force of the Financial
Accounting Standards Board for deferring postretirement benefit
costs as a regulatory asset. Accrual-basis PRB costs applicable to
nonregulated operations are charged to expense,
49.The following table sets forth the components of the accumu-
lated postretirement benefit obligation and a reconciliation of
these amounts to the accrued postretirement benefit liability.
At December 31.
Accumulated postretirement benefit obligation:
Retirees
Fully eligible active employees
Other active employees
Total accumulated postretirement benefit obligation
Unrecognized transition obligation
Unrecognized net gain (loss)
Accrued postretirement benefit liability
The following table sets forth the composition of net post-
retirement benefit cost. Net postretirement benefit cost shown
below does not include the cost of termination benefits described
in Note 7.
Year ended December 31,
Net postretirement benefit cost:
Service cost-benefits earned during
the period
Interest cost on accumulated postretirement
benefit obligation
Amortization of transition obligation
Net amortization and deferral
Total net postretirement benefit cost
Amount capitalized as construction cost
Amount deferred
Amount charged to expense
1993
(In thousands)
1994
50.
$ 5,035
23,037
11,700
646
$ 4,373
40,418
20,451
12,021
36,845
(5,773)
(5,898)
(10,213) (11,965)
$24,432 $18,982
Postretirement benefit costs recognized under the pay-as-you-
go method in 1992 totaled $11.7 million, of which $1.9 million
was capitalized and the remainder was charged to expense.
Other Postemployment Benefits
The Company provides certain pay continuation payments and
health and life insurance benefits to employees of BGE and
certain employees of the Constellation Companies and HPS who
are determined to be disabled under BGE's Long-Term Disability
Plan. The Company adopted Statement of Financial Accounting
Standards No. 112, which requires a change in the method of
accounting for these benefits from the pay-as-you-go method to
1994
Health Care
$161,134
15,777
44,371
221,282
(158,725)
1,238
$ 63,795
Life
Insurance
$45,146
101
12,597
57,844
(46,081)
(2,141)
$ 9,622
(In thousands)
Health Care
$182,638
19,177
58,832
260,647
(179,764)
(36,675)
$ 44,208
Discount rate
Average increase in
future compensation levels
Expected long-term rate of
return on assets
1994
1993
an accrual method, as of December 31, 1993. The liability for
these benefits totaled $48 million and $52 million as of
December 31, 1994 and 1993, respectively. The portion of the
December 31, 1993 liability attributable to regulated activities
was deferred. The amounts deferred will be amortized over a
15-year period beginning in 1998. The adoption of Statement
No. 112 did not have a material impact on net income.
8.5%
Assumptions
The pension and postemployment benefit liabilities were deter-
mined using the following assumptions.
At December 31,
Assumptions:
4.0%
Life
Insurance
9.0%
$45,461
839
15,377
61,677
(48,641)
(9,072)
$ 3,964
1993
7.5%
4.5%
9.5%
The health care inflation rates for 1994 are assumed to be 9.0%
for Medicare-eligible retirees and 11.5% for retirees not covered
by Medicare. Both rates are assumed to decrease by 0.5%
annually to an ultimate rate of 5.5% in the years 2001 and 2006,
respectively. A one percentage point increase in the health care
inflation rate from the assumed rates would increase the accum-
ulated postretirement benefit obligation by approximately
$35 million as of December 31, 1994 and would increase the
aggregate of the service cost and interest cost components of
postretirement benefit cost by approximately $4 million annually.
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and SubsidiariesNote 7. Termination Benefits
BGE offered a Voluntary Special Early Retirement Program (the
1992 VSERP) to eligible employees who retired during the
period February 1, 1992 through April 1, 1992. In accordance
with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 88,
"Employers' Accounting for Settlements and Curtailments of
Defined Benefit Pension Plans and for Termination Benefits," the
one-time cost of termination benefits associated with the 1992
VSERP, which consisted principally of an enhanced pension
benefit, was recognized in 1992 and reduced net income by
$6.6 million, or 5 cents per common share. In April 1993, the
PSC authorized BGE to amortize this charge over a five-year
period for ratemaking purposes. Accordingly, BGE established a
regulatory asset and recorded a corresponding credit to operating
expense for this amount. The reversal of the 1992 VSERP in
April 1993 increased net income by $6.6 million, or 5 cents per
common share,
Note 8. Short-Term Borrowings
Information concerning commercial paper notes and lines of
credit is set forth below. In support of the lines of credit, the
Company pays commitment fees. Borrowings under the lines
Constellation Companies' Lines of Credit
Borrowings outstanding at December 31
BGE's Commercial Paper Notes
Borrowings outstanding at December 31
Weighted average interest rate of notes outstanding at December 31
Unused lines of credit supporting commercial paper notes at December 31
Maximum borrowings during the year
Average daily borrowings during the year (a)
Weighted average interest rate for the year
(b)
BGE offered a second Voluntary Special Early Retirement
Program (the 1993 VSERP) to eligible employees who retired as
of February 1, 1994. The one-time cost of the 1993 VSERP
consisted of enhanced pension and postretirement benefits. In
addition to the 1993 VSERP, further employee reductions have
been accomplished through the elimination of certain positions,
and various programs have been offered to employees impacted
by the eliminations. In accordance with Statement No. 88, the
one-time cost of termination benefits associated with the 1993
VSERP and various programs, which totaled $105.5 million, was
recognized in 1993. The $88.3 million portion of 1993 VSERP
attributable to regulated activities was deferred and is being
amortized over a five-year period for ratemaking purposes,
beginning in February 1994, consistent with previous rate actions
of the PSC. The $17.2 million remaining cost of termination
benefits was charged to expense in 1993.
Weighted average interest rate of borrowings outstanding at December 31
Unused lines of credit at December 31
Maximum borrowings during the year
Average daily borrowings during the year (a)
Weighted average interest rate for the year (b)
are at the banks' prime rates, base interest rates, or at various
money market rates.
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and Subsidiaries
1994
$ 63,700
$
6.10%
$148,000
187,500
74,001
4.83%
%
%
(a) The sum of dollar days of outstanding borrowings divided by the number of days in the period.
(b) Total interest accrued during the period divided by average daily borrowings.
1993
(Dollar amounts in thousands)
$208,000
96,900
10,322
$
%
3.28%
$ 20,000
%
%
1992
$ 11,900
$
3.62%
$203,000
393,650
98,892
4.79%
%
60,670
31,773
6.01%
51.Note 9. Long-Term Debt
First Refunding Mortgage Bonds of BGE
Substantially all of the principal properties and franchises owned
by BGE, as well as the capital stock of Constellation Holdings,
Inc., Safe Harbor Water Power Corporation, HPS and BNG, Inc.,
are subject to the lien of the mortgage under which BGE's
outstanding First Refunding Mortgage Bonds have been issued.
On August 1 of each year, BGE is required to pay to the
mortgage trustee an annual sinking fund payment equal to 1% of
the largest principal amount of Mortgage Bonds outstanding
under the mortgage during the preceding twelve months. Such
funds are to be used, as provided in the mortgage, for the
purchase and retirement by the trustee of Mortgage Bonds of any
series other than the 5%% Installment Series of 2002, the 9%%
Series of 1995, the 8.40% Series of 1999, the 5%% Series of
2000, the 8%% Series of 2001, the 74% Series of 2002, the 6½%
Series of 2003, the 6%% Series of 2003, the 5%% Series of 2004,
the 74% Series of 2007, and the 6%% Series of 2008.
Other Long-Term Debt of BGE
BGE maintains revolving credit agreements that expire at various
times during 1996 and 1997. Under the terms of the agreements,
BGE may, at its option, obtain loans at various interest rates. A
commitment fee is paid on the daily average of the unborrowed
portion of the commitment. At December 31, 1994, BGE had
no borrowings under these revolving credit agreements and
had available $125 million of unused capacity under these
agreements.
The Medium-term Notes Series A mature in February 1996.
The weighted average interest rate for notes outstanding at
December 31, 1994 is 8.22%.
The Medium-term Notes Series B mature at various dates
from July 1998 through September 2006. The weighted average
interest rate for notes outstanding at December 31, 1994 is
8.43%.
The Medium-term Notes Series C mature at various dates
from June 1996 through June 2003. The weighted average
interest rate for notes outstanding at December 31, 1994 is
7.16%.
The principal amounts of the 5½% Installment Series
Mortgage Bonds payable each year are as follows:
Year
1995 through 1997
1998 and 1999
2000 and 2001
2002
52.
(In thousands)
$ 605
690
865
6,725
Long-Term Debt of Constellation Companies
The mortgage and construction loans and other collateralized
notes have varying terms. The $116.6 million of variable rate
notes require periodic payment of principal and interest with
various maturities from September 1995 through July 2009. The
$13 million, 7.67% mortgage note requires monthly interest
payments and is due October 1, 1995. The $6.2 million, 7.73%
mortgage note requires quarterly principal and interest payments
through March 15, 2009.
The unsecured notes outstanding as of December 31, 1994
mature in accordance with the following schedule:
8.35%, due August 28, 1995
8.71%, due August 28, 1996
6.19%, due September 9, 1996
8.93%, due August 28, 1997
6.65%, due September 9, 1997
8.23%, due October 15, 1997
7.05%, due April 22, 1998
7.06%, due September 9, 1998
8.48%, due October 15, 1998
7.30%, due April 22, 1999
8.73%, due October 15, 1999
7.55%, due April 22, 2000
7.43%, due September 9, 2000
Total
The Constellation Companies entered into an unsecured
revolving credit agreement on December 9, 1994 in the amount
of $50 million. This agreement matures December 9, 1997 and
will be used to provide liquidity for general corporate purposes.
As of December 31, 1994, the Constellation Companies had no
borrowings under this agreement.
Weighted Average Interest Rates for Variable Rate Debt
The weighted average interest rates for variable rate debt during
1994 and 1993 were as follows:
BGE
Floating rate series mortgage bonds
Pollution control loan
Port facilities loan
Amount
(In thousands)
$ 20,000
23,000
10,000
52,000
15,000
30,000
25,000
20,000
75,000
90,000
15,000
35,000
30,000
$440,000
Adjustable rate pollution control loan
Economic development loan
Constellation Companies
Mortgage and construction loans
and other collateralized notes
Loans under credit agreements
1994
4.91%
2.80
3.02
3.13
3.00
7.27
1993
%
2.39
2.53
3.00
2.49
6.26
5.94
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and SubsidiariesAggregate Maturities
The combined aggregate maturities and sinking fund require-
ments for all of the Company's long-term borrowings for each of
the next five years are as follows:
Note 10. Redeemable Preference Stock
The 6.95%, 1987 Series and the 7.80%, 1989 Series are subject
to mandatory redemption in their entirety at par on October 1,
1995 and July 1, 1997, respectively.
The following series are subject to an annual mandatory
redemption of the number of shares shown below at par
beginning in the year shown below. At BGE's option, an addi-
tional number of shares, not to exceed the same number as are
mandatory, may be redeemed at par in any year, commencing in
the same year in which the mandatory redemption begins. The
8.25%, 1989 Series, the 8.625%, 1990 Series, and the 7.85%,
1991 Series listed below are not redeemable except through oper-
ation of a sinking fund.
Series
7.50%, 1986 Series
6.75%, 1987 Series
8.25%, 1989 Series
8.625%, 1990 Series
7.85%, 1991 Series
Note 11. Leases
Shares
15,000
15,000
100,000
130,000
70,000
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
Thereafter
Total minimum lease payments
Beginning
Year
1992
1993
1995
The Company, as lessee, contracts for certain facilities and
equipment under lease agreements with various expiration dates
and renewal options. Consistent with the regulatory treatment,
lease payments for utility operations are charged to expense.
Lease expense, which is comprised primarily of operating leases,
totaled $12.7 million, $13.8 million, and $14.0 million for the
years ended 1994, 1993, and 1992, respectively.
The future minimum lease payments at December 31, 1994
for long-term noncancelable operating leases are as follows:
Year
1996
1997
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and Subsidiaries
(In thousands)
$ 4,185
3,881
3,447
2,971
1,409
5,347
$21,240
Year
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
BGE
1995
1996
Constellation
Companies
(in thousands)
$206,063
71,997
80,653
55,396
251,467
The combined aggregate redemption requirements for all
series of redeemable preference stock for each of the next five
years are as follows:
Year
1997
1998
1999
Thereafter
Total minimum rentals
$ 56,112
65,201
125,389
134,973
116,425
With regard to payment of dividends or assets available in the
event of liquidation, preferred stock ranks prior to preference and
common stock; all issues of preference stock, whether subject to
mandatory redemption or not, rank equally; and all preference
stock ranks prior to common stock.
(In thousands)
$61,500
26,000
83,000
33,000
33,000
Certain of the Constellation Companies, as lessor, have
entered into operating leases for office and retail space. These
leases expire over periods ranging from 1 to 22 years, with
options to renew. The net book value of property under operating
leases was $148.8 million at December 31, 1994. The future
minimum rentals to be received under operating leases in effect
at December 31, 1994 are as follows:
Year
(In thousands)
$ 13,143
12,233
11,062
9,718
9,082
73,693
$128,931
53.Note 12. Taxes Other Than Income Taxes
Taxes other than income taxes were as follows:
Year Ended December 31,
Real and personal property
Public service company franchise
Social security
Other
Total taxes other than income taxes
Amounts included above charged to accounts other than taxes
Taxes other than income taxes per Consolidated Statements of Income
Note 13. Commitments, Guarantees, and Contingencies
Commitments
BGE has made substantial commitments in connection with its
construction program for 1995 and subsequent years. In addition.
BGE has entered into two long-term contracts for the purchase of
electric generating capacity and energy. The contracts expire in
2001 and 2013. Total payments under these contracts were $69.4,
$68.7, and $60.6 million during 1994, 1993, and 1992, respec-
tively. At December 31, 1994, the estimated future payments for
capacity and energy that BGE is obligated to buy under these
contracts are as follows:
Year
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
Thereafter
Total payments
(In thousands)
$ 65,249
62,880
60,068
60.699
54.
60,558
272,826
$582,280
Certain of the Constellation Companies have committed to
contribute additional capital and to make additional loans to certain
affiliates, joint ventures, and partnerships in which they have an
interest. As of December 31, 1994, the total amount of investment
requirements committed to by the Constellation Companies is
$43.6 million.
In December, 1994, BGE and HPS entered into agreements
with a financial institution whereby BGE and HPS can sell on an
ongoing basis up to an aggregate of $40 million and $50 million,
respectively, of an undivided interest in a designated pool of
customer receivables. Under the terms of the agreements, BGE and
HPS have limited recourse on the receivables and have recorded a
reserve for credit losses. At December 31, 1994, BGE and HPS
1994
$112,492
48,143
35,269
10,307
206,211
(6,478)
$199,733
1993
(In thousands)
$107,958
48,693
35,724
9,836
202,211
(7,379)
$194,832
1992
$100,419
45,654
34,911
9,355
190,339
(7,335)
$183,004
had sold $30 million and $40 million of receivables, respectively,
under these agreements.
Guarantees
BGE has agreed to guarantee two-thirds of certain indebtedness
incurred by Safe Harbor Water Power Corporation. The amount of
such indebtedness totals $35 million, of which $23.3 million repre-
sents BGE's share of the guarantee. BGE assesses that the risk of
material loss on the loans guaranteed is minimal.
As of December 31, 1994, the total outstanding loans and letters
of credit of certain power generation and real estate projects guar-
anteed by the Constellation Companies were $31.2 million. Also,
the Constellation Companies have agreed to guarantee certain other
borrowings of various power generation and real estate projects.
The Company has assessed that the risk of material loss on the
loans guaranteed and performance guarantees is minimal.
Environmental Matters
The Clean Air Act of 1990 (the Act) contains two titles designed to
reduce emissions of sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide (NOx) from
electric generating stations. Title IV contains provisions for
compliance in two separate phases. Phase I of Title IV became
effective January 1, 1995, and Phase II of Title IV must be imple-
mented by 2000. BGE met the requirements of Phase I by
installing flue gas desulfurization systems and fuel switching and
through unit retirements, BGE is currently examining what actions
will be required in order to comply with Phase II of the Act.
However, BGE anticipates that compliance will be attained by
some combination of fuel switching, flue gas desulfurization, unit
retirements, or allowance trading.
At this time, plans for complying with NO control require-
ments under Title I of the Act are less certain because all imple-
mentation regulations have not yet been finalized by the govern-
ment. It is expected that by the year 1999 these regulations will
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and Subsidiariesrequire additional NOx controls for ozone attainment at BGE's
generating plants and at other BGE facilities. The controls will
result in additional expenditures that are difficult to predict prior to
the issuance of such regulations. Based on existing and proposed
ozone nonattainment regulations, BGE currently estimates that the
NOx controls at BGE's generating plants will cost approximately
$70 million. BGE is currently unable to predict the cost of com-
pliance with the additional requirements at other BGE facilities.
BGE has been notified by the Environmental Protection
Agency and several state agencies that it is being considered a
potentially responsible party (PRP) with respect to the cleanup of
certain environmentally contaminated sites owned and operated by
third parties. In addition, a subsidiary of Constellation Holdings,
Inc. has been named as a defendant in a case concerning an alleged
environmentally contaminated site owned and operated by a third
party. Cleanup costs for these sites cannot be estimated, except that
BGE's 15.79% share of the possible cleanup costs at one of these
sites, Metal Bank of America, a metal reclaimer in Philadelphia,
could exceed amounts recognized by up to approximately
$14 million based on the highest estimate of costs in the range of
reasonably possible alternatives. Although the cleanup costs for
certain of the remaining sites could be significant, BGE believes
that the resolution of these matters will not have a material effect
on its financial position or results of operations.
Also, BGE is coordinating investigation of several former gas
manufacturing plant sites, including exploration of corrective action
options to remove coal tar. However, no formal legal proceedings
have been instituted. BGE has recognized estimated environmental
costs at these sites totaling $37.9 million as of December 31, 1994.
These costs, net of accumulated amortization, have been deferred
as a regulatory asset (see Note 5). The technology for cleaning up
such sites is still developing, and potential remedies for these sites
have not been identified. Cleanup sts in ex of the amounts
recognized, which could be significant in total, cannot presently be
estimated.
Nuclear Insurance
An accident or an extended outage at either unit of the Calvert
Cliffs Nuclear Power Plant could have a substantial adverse effect
on BGE. The primary contingencies resulting from an incident at
the Calvert Cliffs plant would involve the physical damage to the
plant, the recoverability of replacement power costs and BGE's
liability to third parties for property damage and bodily injury.
BGE maintains various insurance policies for these contingencies.
The costs that could result from a major accident or an extended
outage at either of the Calvert Cliffs units could exceed the
coverage limits.
In addition, in the event of an incident at any commercial
nuclear power plant in the country, BGE could be assessed for a
portion of any third party claims associated with the incident.
Under the provisions of the Price Anderson Act, the limit for third
party claims from a nuclear incident is $8.92 billion. If third party
claims relating to such an incident exceed $200 million (the
amount of primary insurance), BGE's share of the total liability for
third party claims could be up to $159 million per incident, that
would be payable at a rate of $20 million per year.
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and Subsidiaries
BGE and other operators of commercial nuclear power plants
in the United States are required to purchase insurance to cover
claims of certain nuclear workers. Other non-governmental
commercial nuclear facilities may also purchase such insurance.
Coverage of up to $400 million is provided for claims against
BGE or others insured by these policies for radiation injuries.
If certain claims were made under these policies, BGE and all
policyholders could be assessed, with BGE's share being up to
$6.08 million in any one year.
For physical damage to Calvert Cliffs, BGE has $2.75 billion of
property insurance, including $1.4 billion from an industry mutual
insurance company. If accidents at any insured plants cause a short-
fall of funds at the industry mutual, BGE and all policyholders
could be assessed, with BGE's share being up to $14.3 million.
If an outage at Calvert Cliffs is caused by an insured physical
damage loss and lasts more than 21 weeks, BGE has up to
$473.2 million per unit of insurance, provided by the same
industry mutual insurance company for replacement power costs.
This amount can be reduced by up to $94.6 million per unit if an
outage to both units at Calvert Cliffs is caused by a singular
insured physical damage loss. If an outage at any insured plant
causes a short-fall of funds at the industry mutual, BGE and all
policyholders could be assessed, with BGE's share being up to
$9.4 million.
Recoverability of Electric Fuel Costs
By statute, actual electric fuel costs are recoverable so long as the
PSC finds that BGE demonstrates that, among other things, it has
maintained the productive capacity of its generating plants at a
reasonable level. The PSC and Maryland's highest appellate court
have interpreted this as permitting a subjective evaluation of each
unplanned outage at BGE's generating plants to determine whether
or not BGE had implemented all reasonable and cost effective
maintenance and operating control procedures appropriate for
preventing the outage. Effective January 1, 1987, the PSC autho-
rized the establishment of the Generating Unit Performance
Program (GUPP) to measure, annually, utility compliance with
maintaining the productive capacity of generating plants at
reasonable levels by establishing a system-wide generating perfor-
mance target and individual performance targets for each base load
generating unit. In future fuel rate hearings, actual generating
performance after adjustment for planned outages will be
compared to the system-wide target and, if met, should signify that
BGE has complied with the requirements of Maryland law. Failure
to meet the system-wide target will result in review of each unit's
adjusted actual generating performance versus its performance
target in determining compliance with the law and the basis for
possibly imposing a penalty on BGE. Parties to fuel rate hearings
may still question the prudence of BGE's actions or inactions with
respect to any given generating plant outage, which could result in
the disallowance of replacement energy costs by the PSC.
Since the two units at BGE's Calvert Cliffs Nuclear Power
Plant utilize BGE's lowest cost fuel, replacement energy costs
associated with outages at these units can be significant. BGE
cannot estimate the amount of replacement energy costs that could
55.be challenged or disallowed in future fuel rate proceedings, but
such amounts could be material.
In October 1988, BGE filed its first fuel rate application for a
change in its electric fuel rate under the GUPP
program. The
resultant case before the PSC covers BGE's operating performance
in calendar year 1987, and BGE's filing demonstrated that it met
the system-wide and individual nuclear plant performance targets
for 1987. In November 1989, testimony was filed on behalf of
Maryland People's Counsel alleging that seven outages at the
Calvert Cliffs plant in 1987 were due to management imprudence
and that the replacement energy costs associated with those
outages should be disallowed by the Commission. Total
replacement energy costs associated with the 1987 outages were
approximately $33 million.
In May 1989, BGE filed its fuel rate case in which 1988 perfor-
mance was to be examined. BGE met the system-wide and nuclear
plant performance targets in 1988. People's Counsel alleges that
BGE imprudently managed several outages at Calvert Cliffs, and
BGE estimates that the total replacement energy costs associated
with these 1988 outages were approximately $2 million.
On November 14, 1991, a Hearing Examiner at the PSC issued
a proposed Order, which became final on December 17, 1991 and
concluded that no disallowance was warranted. The Hearing
Examiner found that BGE maintained the productive capacity of
the Plant at a reasonable level, noting that it produced a near
record amount of power and exceeded the GUPP standard. Based
on this record, the Order concluded there was sufficient cause to
excuse any avoidable failures to maintain productive capacity at
higher levels.
During 1989, 1990, and 1991, BGE experienced extended
outages at its Calvert Cliffs Nuclear Power Plant. In the Spring of
1989, a leak was discovered around the Unit 2 pressurizer heater
sleeves during a refueling outage. BGE shut down Unit 1 as a
precautionary measure on May 6, 1989 to inspect for similar leaks
and none were found. However, Unit 1 was out of service for the
Note 14. Falr Value of Financial Instruments
Current assets
Investments and other assets
Current liabilities
Capitalization
remainder of 1989 and 285 days of 1990 to undergo maintenance
and modification work to enhance the reliability of various safety
systems, to repair equipment, and to perform required periodic
surveillance tests. Unit 2, which returned to service on May 4,
1991, remained out of service for the remainder of 1989, 1990, and
the first part of 1991 to repair the pressurizer, perform maintenance
and modification work, and complete the refueling. The
replacement energy costs associated with these extended outages
for both units at Calvert Cliffs, concluding with the return to
service of Unit 2, is estimated to be $458 million.
56.
In a December 1990 order issued by the PSC in a BGE base
rate proceeding, the PSC found that certain operations and mainte-
nance expenses incurred at Calvert Cliffs during the test year
should not be recovered from ratepayers. The PSC found that this
work, which was performed during the 1989-1990 Unit 1 outage
and fell within the test year, was avoidable and caused by BGE
actions which were deficient,
The following table presents the carrying value and fair value of financial instruments included in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
At December 31,
1993
The Commission noted in the order that its review and findings
on these issues pertain to the reasonableness of BGE's test-year
operations and maintenance expenses for purposes of setting base
rates and not to the responsibility for replacement power costs
associated with the outages at Calvert Cliffs. The PSC stated that
its decision in the base rate case will have no res judicata (binding)
effect in the fuel rate proceeding examining the 1989-1991
outages. The work characterized as avoidable significantly
increased the duration of the Unit 1 outage. Despite the PSC's
statement regarding no binding effect, BGE recognizes that the
views expressed by the PSC make the full recovery of all of the
replacement energy costs associated with the Unit 1 outage
doubtful. Therefore, in December 1990, BGE recorded a provision
of $35 million against the possible disallowance of such costs.
BGE cannot determine whether replacement energy costs may be
disallowed in the present fuel rate proceedings in excess of the
provision, but such amounts could be material.
Carrying
Amount
$ 382,776
138,978
768,932
2,864,432
1994
Fair
Value
$ 382,776
137,782
768,932
2,699,103
(in thousands)
Carrying
Amount
$ 496,919
125,046
443,968
3,165,644
Fair
Value
$ 496,919
129,752
443,968
3,303,616
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and SubsidiariesFinancial instruments included in current assets are cash and
cash equivalents, net accounts receivable, trading securities, and
miscellaneous loans receivable of the Constellation Companies.
Financial instruments included in current liabilities represent total
current liabilities from the balance sheet excluding accrued
vacation costs. The carrying amount of current assets and current
liabilities approximates fair value because of the short maturity
of these instruments,
Investments and other assets include investments in common
and preferred securities, which are classified as financial invest-
ments in the balance sheet, and the nuclear decommissioning
trust fund. The fair value of investments and other assets is based
on quoted market prices where available. Certain investments
with a carrying amount of $70 million at December 31, 1994 and
1993 are excluded from the amounts shown in investments and
other assets because it was not practicable to determine their fair
Note 15. Quarterly Financial Data (Unaudited)
The following data are unaudited but, in the opinion of Manage-
ment, include all adjustments necessary for a fair presentation.
BGE's utility business is seasonal in nature with the peak sales
1994
Revenues
Income from operations
Net income
Earnings applicable to common stock
Earnings per share of common stock
1993
Revenues
Income from operations
Net income
Earnings applicable to common stock
Earnings per share of common stock
March 31
$767.686
162,559
82,145
72,114
0.49
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and Subsidiaries
$701,785
135,429
65,796
55,276
0.38
values. These investments include partnership investments in
public and private equity and debt securities, partnership invest-
ments in solar powered energy production facilities, and invest-
ments in stock trusts.
Financial instruments included in capitalization are long-term
debt and redeemable preference stock. The fair value of fixed-
rate long-term debt and redeemable preference stock is estimated
using quoted market prices where available or by discounting
remaining cash flows at the current market rate. The carrying
amount of variable-rate long-term debt approximates fair value.
BGE and the Constellation Companies have loan guarantees
totalling $23.3 million and $17.0 million, respectively, at
December 31, 1994 and $26.7 and $36.0 million, respectively, at
December 31, 1993 for which it is not practicable to determine
fair value. It is not anticipated that these loan guarantees will
need to be funded.
periods generally occurring during the summer and winter
months. Accordingly, comparisons among quarters of a year may
not be indicative of overall trends and changes in operations.
Quarter Ended
June 30 September 30 December 31
(In thousands, except per-share amounts)
$753,878
232,472
126,616
116,714
0.79
$651,152
136,778
66,708
56,687
0.39
$583,812
106,890
55,876
45,300
0.31
$793,968
287,519
157,058
146,511
1.01
$610,269
103,450
48,148
38,180
0.26
$661,820
86,554
31,136
20,940
0.14
Year Ended
December 31
$2,782,985
635,259
323,617
283,695
1.93
$2,741,385
616,392
309,866
268,027
1.85
wwwdk
Results for the first quarter of 1994 reflect a $10.0 million one-time bonus paid to employees in lieu of a general increase.
Results for the third quarter of 1994 reflect the $15.7 million ($11.0 million after-tax) write-off of certain Perryman costs (see Note 1).
Results for the second quarter of 1993 reflect the reversal of the cost of the termination benefits associated with the 1992 Voluntary Special
Early Retirement Program (see Note 7).
Results for the third quarter of 1993 reflect the effects of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993.
Results for the fourth quarter of 1993 reflect the cost of certain termination benefits (see Note 7).
The sum of the quarterly earnings per share amounts may not equal the total for the year due to changes in the average number of shares
outstanding throughout the year.
Certain prior-year amounts have been reclassified to conform to the current year's presentation.
57.Board of Directors
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company
Christian H. Poindexter,
56, Chairman of the
Board and Chief
Executive Officer
Baltimore Cas and
Electric Company
Mr. Poindexter has served
as BGE's Chairman, CEO and Chairman
of the Board of Constellation Holdings, a
BGE subsidiary, since 1993. He was Vice
Chairman of the Board from 1989 to 1993.
In 1994, he was elected a director of the
newly formed subsidiary, BGE Home
Products & Services. He has been a BGE
director since 1988 and is a member of the
executive committee.
H. Furlong Baldwin, 63,
Chairman of the Board
and Chief Executive
Officer, Mercantile
Bankshares Corporation,
Baltimore
At Mercantile Bankshares,
a bank holding company, Mr. Baldwin has
been Chairman since 1984 and CEO since
1976. He has also served as Chairman and
CEO of Mercantile Safe Deposit and Trust
Company since 1976. In addition, he is a
director of BGE's Constellation Holdings
subsidiary. A BGE director since 1988,
Mr. Baldwin is a member of the executive
committee and chairs the long-range
strategy committee.
Beverly B. Byron, 62,
former Congresswoman,
United States House of
Representatives,
Frederick, Maryland
After serving seven
successive terms as a
Congresswoman from 1978 to 1992, Mrs.
Byron was elected to the BGE board in
1993. A member of the audit committee
and the committee on nuclear power, she
also chairs the committee on workplace
diversity.
58.
BGE Boards of Directors
J. Owen Cole, 65,
Chairman of the Board,
Blue Cross and Blue
Shield of Maryland, Inc.;
Chairman of the trust
committee, First
Maryland Bancorp,
and First National Bank
of Maryland, Baltimore
Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Maryland is
a health insurance provider, and Mr. Cole
was elected as Chairman in January 1995.
Mr. Cole also serves as chairman of the
trust committee of First Maryland Bancorp,
a bank holding company, and First National
Bank of Maryland since 1994. From 1988
to 1994, he served as chairman of the exec-
utive committees of the Board of Directors
of both companies. Mr. Cole has been a
BGE director since 1977 and serves as
chairman of the audit committee and as a
member of the committee on management.
Dan A. Colussy, 63.
Chairman of the Board
and Chief Executive
Officer, UNC
Incorporated, Annapolis,
Maryland
Mr. Colussy has served as
President of UNC Incorporated, an aviation
services
from 1984 to 1994, was
company,
elected CEO in 1984, and became
Chairman in 1989. A BCE director since
1992, Mr. Colussy is a member of the
committee on management and chairs the
committee on nuclear power.
Edward A. Crooke, 56.
President and Chief
Operating Officer
Baltimore Gas and
Electric Company
Mr. Crooke has been
President of BGE since
1988 and COO since 1992. In addition, he
was elected Chairman of the Board of
BGE Home Products & Services, a new
subsidiary created in 1994. He also is a
director of Constellation Holdings. Mr.
Crooke has been a BGE director
since 1988 and is a member of the
executive committee.
James R. Curtiss, Esq.,
41, Partner, Winston &
Strawn, Washington, D.C.
Mr. Curtiss has been a
partner at the law firm of
Winston & Strawn since
1993. A commissioner of
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission from
1988 to 1993, he has been a BGE director
since 1994 and serves on the committees on
nuclear power and workplace diversity,
Jerome W. Geckle, 65,
retired Chairman of the
Board, PHH Corporation
Baltimore
Mr. Geckle was
Chairman of PHH
Corporation, a vehicle,
relocation, and management services
company, from 1979 to 1989. He also
served as that company's CEO from 1979
to 1988. Now retired, he is also a director
of BGE's Constellation Holdings
subsidiary. Mr. Geckle has been a director
of BGE since 1980, chairs the committee
on management, and serves on the long-
range strategy committee.
Martin L. Grass, 41,
President and Chief
Operating Officer,
Rite Aid Corporation,
Camp Hill, Pennsylvania
Mr. Grass joined Rite Aid
Corporation, the largest
retail drug chain in the U.S., in 1978 and
was elected to its Board of Directors in
1982. He has served as that company's
President and COO since 1989. In addition,
he is Vice Chairman, Treasurer, and
Director of Super Rite Foods, Inc., a
Harrisburg, Pennsylvania-based food
wholesaler and retailer. Mr. Grass was
elected to BGE's board effective January 1,
1995, and is a member of the audit and
long-range strategy committees.
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and SubsidiariesFreeman A.
Hrabowski III, 44,
President, University of
Maryland, Baltimore
County
President of the
University of Maryland,
Baltimore County, since 1993, Dr.
Hrabowski served as Interim President
from 1992 to 1993, Executive Vice
President from 1990 to 1992, and Vice
Provost from 1987 to 1990. A director of
BGE since 1994, he is a member of the
audit, executive, and workplace
diversity committees.
Nancy Lampton, 52,
Chairman and Chief
Executive Officer,
American Life and
Accident Insurance
Company of Kentucky,
Louisville, Kentucky
Ms. Lampton has been Chairman and
CEO of American Life and Accident
Insurance since 1972. She has served as a
BGE director since 1994 and is on the
long-range strategy committee and the
committee on workplace diversity.
George V. McGowan,
67, former Chairman of
the Board and Chief
Executive Officer,
Baltimore Gas and
Electric Company
In addition to his
position as BGE Chairman and CEO,
from 1988 to 1992, Mr. McGowan also
served as Chairman of the Board of
BGE's Constellation Holdings subsidiary.
A director at BGE since 1980, he chairs
the executive committee and is a member
of the committee on nuclear power.
BGE Boards of Directors
George L. Russell, Jr.,
Esq., 65, Partner, Piper
& Marbury, Baltimore
Mr. Russell has been a
partner at the Baltimore
law firm of Piper &
Marbury since 1986. A
director of BGE since 1988, he is a
member of the audit and executive
committees.
Michael D. Sullivan,
55, Chairman of
the Board, Waye
Laboratories, Inc., and
Lombardi Research
Group, Joppa.
Maryland
Mr. Sullivan became the Chairman of
Lombardi Research Group and Waye
Laboratories, hair products companies, in
1995. Formerly, he was CEO and
President of Merry-Go-Round Enterprises.
Inc., a specialty retailing company, from
1982 to 1994. Mr. Sullivan has been a
BGE director since 1992 and is a member
of the committees on management and
long-range strategy.
Changes in Directors
Effective January 1, 1995, Martin L...
Grass was elected to the Board of
Directors, replacing Paul G. Miller,
who retired from the Board of Directors
effective December 31, 1994.
Committees of the Board
Executive Committee
The executive committee exercises most
of the powers of the board in managing
company business between meetings of
the full board. This committee may not.
however, declare dividends, authorize
stock issues, recommend to shareholders
any action requiring shareholders'
approval, amend bylaws, or
approve mergers.
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and Subsidiaries
Audit Committee
Comprised of outside directors, this
committee recommends an auditing firm,
discusses the scope of the examination with
that firm, and reviews annual financial state-
ments. Additionally, this committee meets
with the manager of BGE's auditing
department to ensure adequate internal
auditing. It invites comments and recom-
mendations from the auditing firm
concerning the system of internal controls
and accounting procedures.
Committee on Nuclear Power
This committee monitors the performance
and safety of the Calvert Cliffs Nuclear
Power Plant. The committee confers with
BGB management, senior plant manage-
ment, and other nuclear oversight personnel
and reports its observations and findings to
the full board with recommendations.
Committee on Management
The duties of this committee include
recommending nominees for directors and
officers. In addition, it makes recommenda-
tions on remuneration arrangements for
directors and officers. Comprised of
directors from outside the company, this
committee also considers shareholder
recommendations for board nominees.
Committee on Workplace Diversity
This committee provides input to
management in setting and achieving
employee diversity goals. It provides over-
sight of implementation of diversity
strategies and evaluates results.
Long-Range Strategy Committee
This committee oversees development of the
company's long-range strategic goals. It
reviews the appropriateness of these goals and
approves presentations to the board regarding
the implementation of significant strategic
initiatives. This committee also reviews major
regulatory, environmental, and public policy
issues as well as technological advances that
may affect company operations.
59.Corporate Officers
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company
Christian H. Poindexter
Chairman of the Board and Chief
Executive Officer
Age: 56 Years of service: 27
Edward A. Crooke
President and Chief Operating Officer
Age: 56
Years of service: 26
George C. Creel
Senior Vice President, Generation
Age: 60 Years of service: 39
Thomas F. Brady
Vice President, Customer Service
& Distribution
Age: 45
BGE Boards of Directors and Officers
Years of service: 25
Herbert D. Coss, Jr.
Vice President, Gas
Age: 60 Years of service: 38
Robert E. Denton
Vice President, Nuclear Energy
Age: 51 Years of service: 24
Carserlo Doyle
Vice President, Electric Interconnection
& Transmission
Age: 50
Years of service: 23
60.
Jon M. Files
Vice President, Management Services
Age: 59 Years of service: 37
Ronald W. Lowman
Vice President, Fossil Energy
Age: 50
Years of service: 26
G. Dowell Schwartz, Jr.
Vice President, General Services
Age: 58
Years of service: 36
Charles W. Shivery
Vice President, Finance & Accounting
Chief Financial Officer and Secretary
Years of service: 22
Age: 49
Joseph A. Tiernan
Vice President, Corporate Affairs
Age: 56 Years of service: 26
Stephen F. Wood
Vice President, Marketing & Sales
Age: 42 Years of service: 18
Richard M. Bange, Jr.
Controller and Assistant Secretary
Age: 50
Years of service: 23
Lynne H. Church
Treasurer and Assistant Secretary
Age: 51
Years of service: 10
Thomas E. Ruszin, Jr.
Assistant Treasurer
Age: 40
Years of service: 18
Changes in Officers
Stephen F. Wood, former manager of
Special Customer Projects, was elected
to the position of Vice President,
Marketing & Sales, effective
October 1, 1994.
Board of Directors
Constellation Holdings, Inc.
Christian H. Poindexter
Chairman of the Board, Constellation
Holdings; Chairman of the Board and
Chief Executive Officer, Baltimore
Gas and Electric Company; member
since 1985
Bruce M. Ambler
President and Chief Executive Officer,
Constellation Holdings; member
since 1989
H. Furlong Baldwin
Chairman of the Board and Chief
Executive Officer, Mercantile
Bankshares Corporation (bank holding
company), Baltimore; member since
1987; serves on audit committee
Edward A. Crooke
President and Chief Operating Officer,
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company;
member since 1993
Roger W. Gale
President, Washington International
Energy Group (energy consulting),
Washington, D.C.; new member as of
1995; serves on audit committee
Jerome W. Geckle
Retired Chairman of the Board, PHH
Corporation (vehicle, relocation, and
management services), Baltimore;
member since 1985; chairman of
committee on management
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and SubsidiariesBGE Boards of Directors and Officers
Edward W. Kay
Retired Co-Chairman and Chief
Operating Officer, Ernst & Young
(certified public accountants),
Washington, D.C.; member since 1988;
chairman of audit committee
George V. McGowan
Former Chairman of the Board and Chief
Executive Officer, Baltimore Gas and
Electric Company; member since 1983
Mayo A. Shattuck III
President and Chief Operating Officer,
Alex. Brown, Inc. (investment banking
and securities brokerage), Baltimore;
member since 1994; serves on committee
on management
Bernard C. Trueschler
Former Chairman of the Board and
Chief Executive Officer, Baltimore
Gas and Electric Company; member
since 1983
Changes in Directors
Effective January 1, 1995, Roger W. Gale
was elected to the Board of Directors of
Constellation Holdings. Dr. Gale is the
founder and President of the Washington
International Energy Group, which
provides advice, analysis, and tracking to
executives on utility issues.
Paul G. Miller retired from the Board of
Directors, effective December 31, 1994.
Officers
Constellation Holdings, Inc.
Christian H. Poindexter
Chairman of the Board,
Constellation Holdings, Inc.
Bruce M. Ambler
President and Chief Executive Officer,
Constellation Holdings, Inc.
Acting President, Constellation
Energy, Inc.
Steven D. Kesler
President, Constellation
Investments, Inc.
Randall M. Griffin
President, Constellation Real Estate
Group, Inc.
James W. Jeffcoat
President, Constellation Health
Services, Inc.
Robert E. Windham
President, Church Street Station, Inc.
Board of Directors
BGE Home Products & Services, Inc.
BGE Home Products & Services was
created as a wholly owned subsidiary of
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company on
July 1, 1994. The new subsidiary
combined the related activities of
merchandise sales with gas and appliance
operations and will allow BGE greater
freedom to operate in a competitive
marketplace.
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and Subsidiaries
Edward A. Crooke
Chairman of the Board, BGE Home
Products & Services; President and Chief
Operating Officer, Baltimore
Gas and Electric Company
Christian H. Poindexter
Chairman of the Board and Chief
Executive Officer, Baltimore Gas and
Electric Company
William H. Munn
President and Chief Executive Officer,
BGE Home Products & Services
Changes in Directors
Effective January 1, 1995, William H.
Munn was elected President and
Chief Executive Officer of BGE Home
Products & Services. Mr. Munn was the
president and owner of Maryland
Environmental Systems, Inc., a Maryland-
based company specializing in the
installation and service of commercial
and residential heating, air conditioning,
plumbing, and electrical systems. BGE
purchased MESI in December 1994.
Officers
BGE Home Products & Services, Inc.
Edward A. Crooke
Chairman of the Board
William H. Munn
President and Chief Executive Officer
E. Frank Bender
Vice President, Merchandise
61.Common Stock Data
Quarterly Earnings Per Share
First Quarter
Second Quarter
Third Quarter
Fourth Quarter
Total
Dividends
Dividends Declared Per Share
Dividends Paid Per Share
Dividend Payout Ratio
Market Prices
High
Low
Close
Capital Structure
Consolidated
Long-Term Debt
Short-Term Debt
62.
Preferred and Preference Stock
Common Shareholders' Equity
Utility Only
Long-Term Debt
Short-Term Debt
Preferred and Preference Stock
Common Shareholders' Equity
Five-Year Statistical Summary
1994
$.49
.39
.79
.26
$1.93
$1.51
1.50
78.2%
$25%
20%
22%
46.1%
1.0
8.9
44.0
43.6%
1.2
10.5
44.7
1993
$.38
.31
1.01
.14
$1.85
$1.47
1.46
79.5%
$27%
22%
25%
47,4%
M
9.2
43.4
44.5%
10.9
44.6
1992
$.37
.20
.84
.22
$1.63
$1.43
1.42
87.7%
$24%
19%
23%
46.1%
0.2
9.8
43.9
42.9%
0.3
11.6
45.2
1991
$ .40
.38
.84
.05
$1.67
$1.40
1.40
83.8%
$22%
17%
22%
47.8%
3.8
10.1
38.3
45.6%
3.4
12.1
38.9
1990
$.54
.23
.72
(.09)
$1.40
$1.40
1,40
100.0%
$23%
16%
18%
47.9%
4.1
10.2
37.8
45.0%
3.6
12.3
39.1
The sum of the quarterly earnings per shure amounts may not equal the total for the year due to changes in the average number of shares outstanding throughout
the year.
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company and SubsidiariesCommon Stock Dividends and Price Ranges
First Quarter
Second Quarter
Third Quarter
Fourth Quarter
Total
Shareholder Information
Dividend
Declared
$ .37
.38
.38
.38
$ 1.51
1994
Dividend Pollcy
The common stock is entitled to dividends when and as declared
by the Board of Directors. There are no limitations in any inden-
ture or other agreements on payment of dividends. Holders of
preferred stock (first) and holders of preference stock (next),
however, are entitled to receive, when and as declared from the
surplus or net profits, cumulative yearly dividends at the fixed
preferential rate specified for each series and no more, payable
quarterly. They are also entitled to receive, when due, the applic-
able preference stock redemption payments before any dividend
on the common stock shall be paid or set apart. Dividends have
been paid on the common stock continuously since 1910. Future
dividends depend upon future earnings, the financial condition of
the company, and other factors. Quarterly dividends were declared
on the common stock during 1994 and 1993 in the amounts
shown above.
Transfer Agent and Registrar
Harris Trust and Savings Bank
Chicago, Illinois
Common Stock Dividend Dates
Record dates are normally on the 10th of March, June, September,
and December. Quarterly dividends are customarily mailed to
each shareholder on or about the 1st of April, July, October,
and January,
Dividend Reinvestment and Stock Purchase Plan
The company's Dividend Reinvestment and Stock Purchase Plan
provides an opportunity for holders of the company's common
stock to acquire additional shares of such stock in a convenient
and economical manner. Participants in the plan may reinvest cash
dividends on all or a portion of their shares of common stock
and/or make optional cash payments.
Stock Trading
The company's common stock, which is traded under the ticker
symbol BGE, is listed on the New York, Chicago, and Pacific
stock exchanges, and has unlisted trading privileges on the Boston,
Cincinnati, and Philadelphia exchanges. As of December 31, 1994,
there were 81,505 common shareholders of record.
High
$ 25½
24%
23%
23%
Price
Low
$ 22%
20%
20%
21/
Dividend
Declared
Auditors
Coopers & Lybrand L.L.P.
Executive Offices
Gas and Electric Building
Charles Center
$ .36
.37
.37
.37
$1.47
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Mail: P.O. Box 1475
1993
Annual Meeting
The annual meeting of shareholders will be held at 2:00 p.m.
on Tuesday, April 18, 1995, at the Omni Inner Harbor Hotel,
101 West Fayette Street, Baltimore, Maryland,
Form 10-K
Upon written request, the company will furnish, without
charge, a copy of its Form 10-K annual report, including
financial statements, after it is filed with the Securities and
Exchange Commission in March 1995. Requests should be
addressed to Charles W. Shivery, Chief Financial Officer
and Secretary, Vice President-Finance & Accounting,
P. O. Box 1475, Baltimore, Maryland 21203-1475.
Baltimore, Maryland 21203-1475
High
$ 26¾
26%
27/2
26%
Price
Letters should be addressed to:
Low
$ 22%
23%
25%
23½
Shareholders' Inquiries and Assistance
Shareholders desiring assistance with lost or stolen stock
certificates or dividend checks, name changes, address changes,
stock transfers, or other matters should call the shareholder
services representatives on our toll-free telephone numbers.
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company
Shareholder Services
P.O. Box 1642
Baltimore, Maryland 21203-1642
The following toll-free telephone numbers are available
during our business hours, 8:00 a.m. to 4:45 p.m.:
Baltimore Metropolitan Area
Within Maryland
(410) 783-5920
1-800-492-2861
Outside of Maryland
1-800-258-0499
TTY/TDD Hearing Impaired
1-800-492-5539
63.