MAR 19 1996
DISCLOSURE ONL
h in a
World of
Opportunities
1995 ANNUAL REPORT
01146774GROWTH IN A WORLD OF OPPORTUNITIES
CMS Energy is an international energy company
($8 billion assets, $4 billion sales) that is engaged in
developing, owning and operating a wide range of
energy ventures around the world.
The company currently has energy activities in
22 countries on five continents. CMS Energy's experience
covers the full spectrum: electric and natural gas utility.
operations; electric power generation; oil and gas
exploration and production; natural gas transmission
and storage; and energy marketing.
Each of the company's major businesses is an industry
leader. Together, they form an energy infrastructure
company that offers unique capabilities for growth in an
energy dependent world.
Internationally, CMS Energy's efforts are concentrated
in countries that either have a demonstrated need for
additional energy, or which have concluded that their
economies can benefit from privatizing their energy
infrastructures. These opportunities provide high growth
potential for CMS Energy.
In the U.S., CMS Energy's non-utility businesses enjoy
strong market positions that also have growth potential. The
company expects its utility businesses will enjoy a greater-
than GNP growth rate, because of their attractive market
area and continuing business development.
The company's business strategy is designed to create an
opportunity to increase total return to shareholders at 12
to 15 percent per year. That goal is unique in CMS Energy's
industry, there are few utility-related companies in the
United States that have those kind of growth prospects.
3.HOUSTON
★ Offices
JACKSON DEARBORN
WASHINGTON, DC.
+ COLOMBIA
ECUADOR
PERU
CMS ENERGY:
GROWTH IN A WORLD
OF OPPORTUNITIES
KANNADANANarendra
Electric Utility
Natural Gas Utility
▲ Independent Power Production
■ Oil and Gas Exploration and Production
Natural Gas Transmission, Storage
and Marketing
+ CHILE
UNITED STATES
BOGOJA
JAMAICA A
BUENOS AIRES
ELECTRIC UTILITY
VENEZUELA
SURINAME
URUGUAY +
ARGENTINA A+
:
Business Description
Thirteenth-largest investor-owned electric
company in the U.S.
1.6 million electric customers
Michigan's lowest-cost major electricity
supplier
Fossil-fuel generating system among the
nation's five most efficient
Markets
Electric utility operations provide energy
to 61 of the 68 counties in Michigan's
Lower Peninsula
▲ MOROCCO
■ EQUATORIAL GUINEA
NATURAL GAS UTILITY
CONGO
Business Description
• Fifth-largest gas distribution company in
the U.S.
+1.5 million customers
180 billion cubic feet of working gas storage
capacity is among the largest in the U.S.
Michigan's largest gas utility in customers
and geographic area
Markets
•Gas utility operations provide energy
to 54 of the 68 counties in Michigan's
Lower Peninsula
M
iTUNISIA
A INDIA
YEMEN
INDEPENDENT POWER PRODUCTION
Business Description
•Among the largest U.S.-based developers
and operators of independent power projects
around the world
CMS Energy has interests in 29 plants
totaling 4,200 gross megawatts
Has under advanced development more
than 2,000 gross megawatts of projects
Skilled in generating power utilizing diverse
fuels and power technologies
Markets
CMS Generation Co. provides project
development, engineering, management and
operations for independent power plants in
the U.S., Latin America, southern Asia and
the Pacific Rim
THAILAND
■VIETNAM
+ INDONESIA
•
OIL AND GAS EXPLORATION
AND PRODUCTION
SINGAPORE
▲ + AUSTRALIA
Business Description
Among the 30 largest independent oil and
gas companies in the U.S.
Michigan's largest independent oil and
gas producer
•Proved reserves of 111 million net
equivalent barrels
Increased pretax operating income by
275 percent
Markets
•CMS NOMECO Oil & Gas Co. produced oil and
natural gas from more than 2,738 wells in the
U.S. and seven other countries
Ang
PHILIPPINES A
NATURAL GAS TRANSMISSION,
STORAGE AND MARKETING
Business Description
• Market territory covers more than 30 major
gas distribution companies
Activities in 18 states
• Owns interests in 13 U.S. natural gas facilities
*Owns interest in a major pipeline system
in Argentina
Markets
CMS gas operations provide distribution
companies, pipelines and commercial and
industrial end-users with gas procurement,
gathering, processing, pipeline transportation
and storage
.............
1FINANCIAL HIGHLIGHTS
December 31
Revenue
Electric utility
Gas utility
Oil and gas exploration and production
Independent power production
Natural gas transmission, storage and marketing(*)
Other
Total(a)
Consolidated Revenue
Net income
Return on equity
Per common share
Net income
Dividends declared
Book value
Market value (year-end)
(a) Includes CMS Energy's share of unconsolidated revenue.
Pretax Operating Income
Electric
Utility
Dollars in Millons
286
13303
93
I
302
94 05
I
I
Natural Gan
Utility
Dollars in Millions
B3 94
151
96
Independent Power
Production
Dollars in Millions
98
21
94
46
95
8
1995
$2,277
1,195
108
535
213
18
$4,346
$3,890
$ 204
15.9%
$ 2.27
$ .90
$15.16
$29.87
Oil and Gas Exploration
and Production
Dollars in Millions
98 94
30
96
In Millions, Except as Noted
Percent
Change
1994
$2,189
1,151
78
404
149
5
$3,976
$3,614
$ 179
17.8%
$ 2.09
$ .78
$12.78
$22.87
7
9
+4.0
+3.8
+38.5
+32.4
+43.0
+260.0
+9,3
Natural Gas
Transmission, Storage
and Marketing
Dollars in Millions
98 94
+7.6
+14.0
-8,1
+8.6
+15.4
+18,6
+30.6
95
......
:PROGRESS IN ACHIEVING LONG-TERM BUSINESS STRATEGIES
The theme for this year's annual report is Growth in a World of Opportunities.
That growth is the result of a strong vision for the future and consistent business
strategies. CMS Energy's vision and strategies have been detailed in many past annual
reports, and the company has delivered on those promises. They are paying off for
shareholders today, and will remain the foundation for future growth.
STRATEGY
Return the company to
financial health.
STATUS
995 is the third consecutive
190
year growth profitabil
ity and business expansion.
The common equity to total
capital ratio has already
improved by about 50 percent
over the last three years, and
the company is working on
further improvements.
STRATEGY
Develop CMS Energy into
an international, full-service
energy company.
STATUS
MS Energy now is active in
22
nents, and is a leader in each
of its energy businesses -
electric and natural gas util-
ity operations; electric power
generation; oil and gas explo-
ration and production; and
natural gas transmission,
storage and marketing. In
1995, international energy
businesses' contribution to
operating earnings increased
212 percent. Assets in this
group total $1.9 billion.
2
STRATEGY
Position the utility businesses
for increasing deregulation
and competition.
STATUS
MS Energy restructured
its utility business into
electric and gas strategic
business units to improve
their focus and ability to com-
pete. The electric business
has signed a number of long-
term contracts with industrial
customers, ensuring that the
company
will be the sole
electricity provider for nearly
31 percent of its industrial
load, and 85 percent of its cur-
rent "at risk" load. The gas
business is positioned to
increase revenue at a pace
exceeding the industry.
STRATEGY
Improve regulatory
relationships.
STATUS
MS Energy has worked
good work-
Chr
ing relationships with its
utility regulators, State
regulators have responded by
recognizing the importance of
pricing flexibility for large,
"at risk" customers, and by
improving the speed of the
regulatory process. Federal
regulators have approved a
major settlement on the
company's Ludington
Pumped Storage Plant and
recognized improvements
made at the Palisades
nuclear plant, by giving the
plant improved ratings.
STRATEGY
Increase market recognition
of the value of CMS Energy
and its individual energy
businesses.
STATUS
MS Energy's stock has
$7 per share in early 1986,
to over $31 per share in
February 1996. CMS Energy
is also maximizing the invest-
ment value of its diversified
energy portfolio by providing
new ways to invest directly in
its businesses. The new
Class G stock reflects the
performance of the regu-
lated gas utility business,
and is the first "tracking"
stock ever issued by a U.S.
combination utility.TO OUR SHAREHOLDERS
Growth in a
World of
Opportunities
This is a very exciting time for the energy industry. With
less regulation and more competition developing in the
U.S., and privatization of energy facilities around the
world, new opportunities abound. Our anticipation of these
changes helped us develop business strategies that have
made CMS Energy an industry leader. Importantly, these
strategies are providing steady earnings growth for
our shareholders.
Net income increased 14 percent in 1995, to $204 million,
and earnings per share increased 9 percent, to $2.27 per share.
From left to right: Michael G. Morris, CMS Energy Executive
Vice President and Consumers Power President and CE();
William T. McCormick Jr., CMS Energy Chairman and CEO;
and Victor J. Fryling, CMS Energy President and COO.
As a result of its strong financial performance, the company
was able to increase dividends to CMS Energy shareholders
14 percent in August.
International energy operations demonstrated increasing
future importance, with a 212 percent increase in operating
earnings versus 1994. These non-utility energy businesses
accounted for more than half of CMS Energy's 1995 increase in
pretax operating income. This performance was primarily due
to acquisitions and internal growth in each of our international
energy businesses.
3
.....……….….
**********………………......
**********.....Our electric and gas utility operations also had a strong
performance. Pretax operating income increased 9.7 percent
in 1995, due to increased electric and gas sales and strict oper-
ating cost controls. And Consumers Power added its 3 millionth
customer in 1995, and continues to add customers.
We expect to continue our growth in 1996. For example,
CMS NOMECO Oil & Gas Co., our oil and gas exploration com-
pany, increased production and made acquisitions during the
year that will contribute to growth for the full year 1996.
CMS Generation Co., our independent power subsidiary,
completed the acquisition of HYDRA-CO in 1995, and is
completing several new power plants. CMS Gas Transmission
and Storage during 1995 acquired 25 percent of Transportadora
de Gas del Norte (TGN), a major gas pipeline in northern and
central Argentina.
Natural Gas Stock Is a U.S. First
The significance of our regulated gas utility opera-
tions, which are the fifth-largest in the U.S., was
recognized with a successful initial public offering
of CMS Class G stock. This is the first "tracking"
stock-tied to the financial performance of a seg-
ment of a company's operations-ever offered by a
U.S. combination utility. Michigan residents, many
of them Consumers Power customers, purchased
4 million shares, more than half of the 7.5 million
shares offered.
4
16-5
Natural gas sales increased 5 percent in actual
terms and 2 percent on a weather-adjusted basis.
Natural gas transportation services for large end-
use customers who buy their natural gas from other
sources grew more than 10 percent on both an
actual and weather-adjusted basis during 1995.
While the key components of gas deliveries-sales and
transportation for large end-use customers-increased sig-
nificantly, the company's total gas deliveries declined 1 per-
cent in 1995, largely due to a lower volume of gas transported
to the Midland Cogeneration Venture (MCV). The company's
transport to the MOV dropped when the MCV received a direct
connection to a pipeline company for gas that previously
flowed through Consumers Power's pipeline system. The
company still maintains a 20-year contract with the MCV to
provide gas transportation.
CMS Energy
Net Income
Dollars in Millions
Nearly 27,000 families and businesses became new gas cus-
tomers in 1995. We anticipate gas deliveries will grow about
2 percent each year over the next five years, as our customer
base continues to expand and additional customers convert to
clean-burning natural gas. In addition, we're offering value-
added services to grow the company.
179
98 94
Electric Utility Meeting Competition
The most formidable challenge in our electric utility
business is increasing competition. That competition cur-
rently includes the installation of cogeneration and self-
generation facilities by large industrial customers. In the
future, it could also include competition at the retail level
from other providers.
Fortunately, in meeting this competition,
Consumers Power is drawing from its experiences
and successes in the deregulation of the natural
gas industry. The company also has the benefit of
the Michigan Public Service Commission (MPSC),
whose members understand the importance of
ensuring utilities successfully make the transition
to a competitive marketplace.
The MPSC has responded quickly and favorably
to Consumers Power's efforts to sign long-term con-
tracts with major industrial customers who have
viable alternative energy options. They include
an agreement with General Motors, Consumers
Power's largest customer, and with Dow Corning,
Hemlock Semiconductor, and Pharmacia & Upjohn.
These five-to ten-year contracts ensure that
Consumers Power will be the sole supplier of elec-
tricity for manufacturing facilities, at prices that will help the
customers remain competitive.
204
95
In an effort to make Michigan electric utilities and rates
more competitive, Governor John Engler asked the MPSC to
consider a framework for utility reform designed by the
Michigan Jobs Commission. Over a five-year period, the pro-
posed framework phases in a deregulation program that
allows Michigan utilities to recover stranded costs, toeliminate mandated conservation and demand-side manage-
ment programs and to develop a new electricity pool.
Our electric sales for 1995 rose 3 percent, to a record
35.5 billion kilowatt-hours, as the utility added more
than 23,000 new electric customers to its system
last year. Consumers Power expects annual elec-
tric system sales to grow an average of about
2 percent during the next five years, because of
economic growth in Michigan and an increasing
customer base.
For the third straight year, the utility's em-
ployees earned the National Safety Council's first-
place award for the safest combination utility in
the U.S. And the company and its union work force
negotiated an unprecedented five-year contract
that will provide the basis for further efficiency
and productivity improvements.
CMS Energy
Earnings per Share
Dollars
1.90
93 94
International Strategy Is Succeeding
Our strategy of positioning CMS Energy as the pre-
mier international energy infrastructure company is beginning
to reap benefits. Each of our non-utility businesses-indepen-
dent power, oil and gas exploration and production, and
natural gas transmission, storage and marketing-saw
substantial growth in 1995. Together, these companies offer
synergies that provide a competitive edge in expanding energy
markets around the world.
2.09
Many South American countries are growing their econo-
mies at 5 to 8 percent per year. The need for an energy infrastruc-
ture to sustain this growth, and substantial industrial expansion
in the region, provide plentiful opportunities.
As part of our strategy of concentrating our investments in
specific regions, CMS Energy is now the largest U.S. energy
investor in Argentina. Current investments total about
$240 million, with opportunities to invest another $150 million
in new projects and power plants. CMS Energy has ownership
interests totaling 442 megawatts in three operating power
plants in Argentina, with construction of a fourth scheduled to
begin early in 1996. The natural gas-fueled La Plata plant, in
Buenos Aires Province, will generate 120 megawatts of
electricity and process steam.
As the largest owner of TGN, CMS Energy also is involved
in the South American pipeline industry. Our other
South American activities include an energy marketing business
in Argentina, a gas storage development in Uruguay
and oil production in Venezuela, Ecuador and
Colombia, which totaled 1.7 million barrels in 1995.
We are working to duplicate this regional con-
centration in other parts of the world. CMS
NOMECO has been heavily involved in African cil
exploration and development in Equatorial
Guinea, the Congo and Tunisia. And CMS
Generation is negotiating the privatization, expan-
sion and operation of a 1,820 megawatt electric
generating plant in Morocco.
In December, we opened a regional headquar-
ters in Singapore, as a base from which to expand
our existing presence in south Asia and the Pacific
Rim. We already are part owner and operator of
two generating plants on the Philippine island
of Cebu and are currently constructing a 235
megawatt power plant in India. Over the next five years,
CMS intends to significantly expand its presence in the
Asian region.
Our vision of the future remains clear: we will continue to
be one of America's largest and most successful electric and
natural gas utilities, and also pursue a wide range of high-
growth, energy-related opportunities across the U.S. and
around the world.
2.27
95
We extend sincere thanks to all of our employees for their
innovation and hard work. I particularly want to thank
S. Kinnie Smith, who retired in February as vice chairman, for
his significant contributions. My thanks also to our board of
directors for its counsel and support.
William T. McComich J.
William T. McCormick Jr.
Chairman and
Chief Executive Officer
March 5, 1996
5ELECTRIC UTILITY
1995 OPERATING HIGHLIGHTS
Set an all-time hourly demand record of 7,158 megawatts.
Increased electric sales by 3 percent.
Added 23,408 new electric customers.
Operation and maintenance costs per customer are third-lowest
of the nation's 30 largest electric utilities.
Electric Sales
Billions of Kilowatt-hours
6
44.5
35.5
91 92 93 94 95
C
onsumers Power's electric operations are positioned
to thrive in an electric industry that is quickly
becoming more competitive and less regulated. Long
recognized for its operating excellence at generating
plants, Consumers Electric is aggressively managing its
costs and responding to its customers' needs.
Consumers Electric in 1995 negotiated long-term, com-
petitively priced agreements with a number of large indus-
trial customers. These agreements ensure that Consumers
Electric will remain the sole electric provider for nearly
31 percent of the kilowatt-hours of its industrial load,
and 85 percent of its current "at risk" load. Negotiations
with additional customers continue.
These contracts demonstrate that Consumers Electric
can successfully meet competition from independent power
producers, cogeneration and neighboring utilities.
The company now provides each of its 200 largest elec-
tric customers with a corporate account manager who inter-
acts with them face-to-face on electric service issues.
A Business Center provides 5,000 key commercial and indus-
trial customers with statewide, 24-hour service.
Consumers Electric is also responding to its residential
customers' needs. Reengineering efforts helped the electric
field operations reduce operating expenses by nearly
10 percent in 1995. A new scheduling process is being imple-
mented to improve productivity. New technology will com-
puterize work orders and maps, to make work crews more
effective and allow for more responsive service.
Positive Business Climate
Michigan's steady economy continues to fuel increased elec-
tric sales. Hot summer weather and strong industrial activity
pushed hourly demand past 7,000 megawatts for the first
time in company history to a record 7,158 megawatts. Elec-
tric transmission employees handled that peak demand in
August without losing service to a single customer.
Consumers Electric employees have helped reduce average outage times by
41 percent since 199419₂
The company's good relations with state regulators also
create a positive climate for growth. The Michigan Public
Service Commission demonstrated its support for helping
utilities make the transition to a competitive environment,
by providing prompt approvals of the company's long-term
agreements with its large industrial customers. The
Commission also granted the company's request to discon-
tinue its demand-side management program, avoiding
nonproductive expenditures of between $45 million and
$60 million over the next two years.
In February of this year, the Commission granted a $46.5
million electric rate increase and reduced residential rate
subsidies by large industrial customers. This allows the com-
pany to offset a lower, more competitive price for its indus-
trial customers with an increase in residential rates. Even
with this increase, residential rates will remain lower than
56 percent of the nation.
Operational Excellence
Excellent operating performance is important in a competi-
tive environment. A. clear demonstration of the utility's
committed work force is the fact that 85 percent of em-
ployees from both the electric and gas sides of the business
own stock in the company. Each day, these employees make
decisions as if their own money is at stake.
Their efforts have produced efficiencies that include:
• the third-lowest operation and maintenance costs per
customer among the nation's 30 largest electric utilities;
• an employee-customer ratio of 254 customers for every
employee.
One measure of the reliability of the transmission and
distribution systems is customer outage minutes. Since
1994, the average length of time customers were without
power has decreased by 41 percent.
Consumers Electric generating plants performed well last
year. The Big Rock Point nuclear plant set a new generating
record the highest in the plant's 33-year history-while
surpassing 18 years without a lost-time accident. The
Palisades nuclear plant set an all-time generation record of
337 continuous days before its scheduled refueling and
maintenance outage. Outage work was completed ahead of
schedule and under budget.
An agreement made last year with environmental groups
and state and federal agencies settles a long-standing dispute
over the Ludington Pumped Storage Plant and its impact on
fish. Approved by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission,
the settlement enhances fishing in Lake Michigan and will
improve recreational facilities throughout Michigan.
11
"Our long-term contract
with Consumers gives us
the rates we need, with
a company that has a
track record of reliability."
Dave Sclimitt
Director of Plant Services for
Pharmacia & UpjohnGAS UTILITY
1995 OPERATING HIGHLIGHTS
Close allgnment with industrial customers led to conversions
of 11 sites from alternate fuels to natural gas, resulting In
2.8 billion cubic feet of annualized consumption.
Sales of value-added services such as carbon monoxide detectors
and furnace repairs are strong.
Added 26,952 new natural gas customers.
Operation and maintenance costs per customer are sixth-lowest
among the nation's 30 largest gas utilities.
Gas Deliverles
Billions of Cubic Feet
8
302
411 408 404
91 92 98 94 95
•JAN
Thousands of customers have signed up for HouseCall, a program that pro-
vides repair services for natural gas furnaces and appliances.
C
onsumers Power is aggressively growing its natural gas
business by adding new customers, effecting fuel con-
versions from alternate fuels to natural gas and
increasing revenues from value-added services.
In 1995, Consumers Gas sales increased 5 percent in
actual terms and 2 percent on a weather-adjusted basis.
Natural gas transportation services for large end-use cus-
tomers who buy their natural gas from other sources grew
more than 10 percent on both an actual and weather-
adjusted basis during 1995. This growth is significant, since
energy conservation measures over the past 12 years have
decreased gas use per residential customer by 9.6 percent
and 14.6 percent for commercial customers.
The reasons for this growth can be attributed to low cus-
tomer rates, reliable service, aggressive marketing and a
healthy service territory.
While the key components of gas deliveries - transpor-
tation for large end-use customers and sales increased
significantly, total gas deliveries declined 1 percent in 1995,
largely due to a lower volume of gas transported to the
Midland Cogeneration Venture (MCV). This happened
because the MCV received a direct connection to a pipeline
company for gas that previously flowed through the com-
pany's system. The company still maintains a 20-year gas
transportation contract with the MCV.
Competitive Rates
In a survey of major U.S. markets, the company's residential
rates ranked sixth-lowest in the nation. At year-end, gas rates
were nearly 8 percent lower than a year earlier.
The company's operation and maintenance costs are the
sixth-lowest among the 30 largest gas companies in the
nation. Extensive gas storage and access to a wide selection
of gas suppliers through several interstate pipelines also
keep gas flowing reliably and at affordable prices. During the1994-1995 winter heating season, for example, more than
50 percent of customer demand was met with stored gas.
Growth Through Marketing Programs
Consumers Gas began a program last year to accelerate the
extension of gas mains into some of the fastest-growing
areas of Michigan.
The company also has reengineered and streamlined
operations so that when a customer decides to hook up to
Consumers Gas or Consumers Electric, there's a minimum of
delay. It once took six weeks to hook up a new customer; this
can now be done within a week. Consumers Gas added
26,952 new customers in 1995.
Consumers Gas generates significant revenue from
unbundled transportation services. In 1995, nearly one-fifth
of the company's gas deliveries were transportation services
for large end-use customers. Those deliveries totaled 81 bil-
lion cubic feet, nearly 11 percent higher than in 1994.
Natural gas conversions present another exciting market
segment that the company is pursuing aggressively. Recent
conversions include:
• The Selfridge Air National Guard base converted its coal-
fired steam plant to natural gas. This reduced the
Selfridge plant's emissions, while increasing its operating
efficiencies and eliminating the need for coal stockpiles.
• Two Chrysler plants in Sterling Heights converted boilers to
natural gas from coal.
• Two General Motors facilities in Pontiac are converting
boilers to natural gas from coal.
Increased Revenue from Retall Customers
The company's move into the carbon monoxide detector
market was highly successful during the 1995-1996 heating
season. Additionally, thousands of customers signed up for
HouseCall- — a program that provides repair services for
natural gas furnaces and applia ces.
The company is pursuing natural gas vehicles (NGVs) as
a new retail growth market. NGVs are economical to oper-
ate and reduce tailpipe emissions by as much as 90 percent
without compromising performance.
The company participated in Clean Across Michigan, in
which 20 NGVs traveled 450 miles across Michigan's Lower
Peninsula to promote NGV fueling stations in Michigan.
Consumers Gas also participated in the North American
International Auto Show- -one of the largest auto shows
in the world. Displayed beside other 1996 cars, trucks and
vans from the world's auto manufacturers, the NGVs
attracted large crowds.
"We've expanded several
times at this location.
Each time we expected
Consumers Power to
provide reliable and
timely services during
construction, and they've
never let us down.”
Michael Bolotta
Sales and Service Representative
Super Steel Treating CompanyINDEPENDENT POWER PRODUCTION
1995 OPERATING HIGHLIGHTS
Chosen to negotiate privatization of Morocco's largest power plant.
MCV's strong performance In 1995 resulted in a 184 percent
increase in pretax operating income to CMS Energy.
The Genesee Power Station was completed under budget and
ahead of schedule, permitting commercial operation in early 1996.
Projects under construction in Jamaica and India are
progressing well.
Opened regional office In Singapore.
Generating Capacity
Net Megawatts
781
10
765
1,118
1,074
1,481
91 92 93 94 95
MS Energy's most rapidly growing business segment
C
has been its independent power production business.
Fueled by the explosive energy needs in developing
countries and the privatization of nationalized energy
assets around the world, this exciting growth will continue
well beyond 1996.
CMS Generation Co., which has grown to be among the
largest U.S.-based independent power producers, reported
pretax operating income of $46 million in 1995, 128 percent
higher than the previous year. CMS Energy had ownership
interests in 29 operating power plants at year-end 1995,
representing nearly 4,200 gross megawatts, with more than
2,000 megawatts under advanced development. Substantial
growth in earnings and capacity owned are expected in 1996
and beyond.
Operating Performance Is Strong
An important part of the CMS Generation success story is
its strong performance in operating its power plants around
the world. Plant availability, safety and environmental per-
formance are outstanding, contributing to earnings. Assets
which are not material to earnings or not performing are
"pruned" as part of an asset harvesting program to keep
management focused.
The Midland Cogeneration Venture, in which CMS has
a 49 percent ownership interest, showed strong performance
in 1995. Pretax operating income to CMS Energy was
$34.6 million, an increase of 184 percent over the previous
year, primarily due to higher sales, higher availability and
lower fuel costs.
CMS increased its ownership to 17.23 percent in the
1,200 megawatt El Chocón hydroelectric plant in Argentina.
This is consistent with CMS Generation's strategy of increas-
ing its ownership in operating plants and making larger
investments in power plants, which will contribute material
In December 1995, CMS opened a regional office for Asian business develop-
ment in Singapore. Celebrating the opening were (from left) Timothy Chorba,
U.S. Ambassador to Singapore; Victor Fryling, CMS Energy President and
COO; Rodney Boulanger, CMS Generation President and CEO; and Philip Yeo,
Chairman, Economic Development Board of Singapore.R
earnings to a growing operation while reducing overhead as
a percent of earnings.
In Morocco, CMS Generation and a partner are in
advanced negotiations to privatize and expand the Jorf
Lasfar plant, that country's largest generating plant, which
will total four units and 1,320 megawatts. CMS Generation
expects to operate the two existing coal-fired units, and will
oversee construction of two more units.
CMS Expands International Presence
Last year, CMS Energy opened a regional office in Singapore
as a base from which all its international business units can
serve Asia's growing energy needs. Asía dominates the world
in its need for new power generation capacity over the next
five years. CMS Generation plans major capital investments
in projects in the region during that time.
The company currently operates two plants on the
Philippine island of Cebu. In India, construction continues
on the 235 megawatt GVK Industries project, which is
expected to begin generating electricity in late 1996. CMS
will have a 25 percent ownership interest in the natural gas-
and naphtha-fueled plant.
The energy needs of Latin America also continue to
grow, Already, CMS Energy is the largest U.S. energy
investor in Argentina, thanks in part to CMS Generation's
operations there.
CMS Generation currently owns interests in three gener.
ating plants in Argentina: the 1,200 megawatt El Chocón
hydro project, the 120 megawatt Arroyito hydro plant and
the 422 megawatt natural gas-fueled CTM Mendoza plant.
Groundbreaking is planned this year on a fourth Argentine
plant. The company will operate and own 39 percent of the
120 megawatt La Plata natural gas-fueled plant in Buenos
Aires Province. The plant will supply YPF, the country's
largest oil company, with electricity and process steam for
their largest refinery.
In Jamaica, a 60 megawatt diesel plant now under con-
struction is expected to be completed in the fourth quarter
of 1996. CMS Generation will be a co-operator of the plant,
in which it has a 43 percent ownership interest. In the U.S.,
the waste wood-fueled Genesee plant recently began com-
mercial production. The 36 megawatt plant was completed
under budget and three months ahead of schedule.
CMS Generation's plans for the near-term are to continue
building a world-recognized independent power company.
The company will continue to focus on Latin America,
Asia and the Pacific Rim in pursuing the acquisition and
operation of electric generating plants.
"We ap
approached
CMS Energy because
we had confidence in
their work from our
experience with them
on the Midland
Cogeneration
Venture project."
Peter Giller
President of ABB Energy Ventures.OIL AND GAS EXPLORATION AND PRODUCTION
1995 OPERATING HIGHLIGHTS
Grew production 60 percent domestically and overseas.
Increased proved reserves by 19 percent.
Acquired Terra Energy Ltd., becoming the largest Antrim
gas producer in Michigan.
Acquired Walter International, Increasing International reserves
by 20 million barrels.
Assumed operation of two significant offshore projects.
Production
Millions of Net
Equivalent Barrels
4.0
12
19
5.0
5.6
91 92 93 94 05
The acquisition of Terra Energy positioned CMS NOMECO as the largest oper
ator of gas wells in Michigan's Antrim formation.
MS NOMECO Oil & Gas Co.'s shift in emphasis, from oil
C
and gas exploration to producing revenue from proved
reserves, gained momentum in 1995 as production
increased nearly 60 percent. As a result, pretax operating
income grew to $30 million in 1995, from $8 million in 1994,
an increase of 275 percent.
CMS NOMECO substantially increased its proved
reserves last year with two major acquisitions that added
36 million net equivalent barrels. The company will con-
tinue to pursue acquisitions of producing properties with
significant additional exploration and development upside,
in regions where CMS NOMECO has solid experience.
At year-end 1995, CMS NOMECO's proved reserves had
increased 19 percent, to 111 million net equivalent barrels.
Production increased about 60 percent to almost 9 million
net equivalent barrels.
The company's U.S. and international interests are bal-
anced geographically and between gas and oil. At year-end,
57 percent of reserves were foreign, and 43 percent were
domestic. In 1995, production consisted of 51 percent oil,
focused primarily in South America and offshore West Africa,
and 49 percent natural gas, focused primarily in the U.S.
Growth by Acquisitions
Acquisition of Terra Energy Ltd., for about $63 million, posi-
tioned CMS NOMECO as the largest operator of gas wells in
Michigan's Antrim formation. The company now operates
approximately 1,370 Antrim wells, or about 30 percent of all
producing wells in the Antrim formation. The acquisition
added net production of about 10 million cubic feet of gas
per day, and net proved reserves of more than 96 billion
cubic feet.Walter International, an oil company which owns inter-
ests in fields offshore of Equatorial Guinea and the Congo,
and in Tunisia, was acquired by CMS NOMECO for about
$49 million in 1995. The acquisition added net proved
reserves of about 20 million barrels of oil.
As a result of the acquisition, CMS NOMECO is the opera-
tor and has a 44 percent working interest in the offshore
Yombo Field in the Congo. Oil is processed on board a self-
contained floating production, storage and off-loading vessel
anchored on the site. The company's share of production in
1995 was 3,200 barrels of oil per day. In 1996, the company
hopes to increase production to 6,500 barrels per day.
The company's share of production in Equatorial Guinea,
where it also is the operator, was about 1,900 barrels of oil
per day in 1995. Production is expected to increase when a
$20 million liquid petroleum gas extraction plant is com-
pleted later this year. Gross production at the plant is
expected to be 2,500 barrels per day of liquid petroleum gas
and 400 barrels per day of condensate.
In Venezuela's Colón unit, CMS NOMECO has a 29 percent
working interest in a consortium involved in a "reactivation
program" to improve production. In 1995, the effort increased
production 52 percent. Plans for additional work in 1996
include drilling nine development wells and three exploratory
wells, in addition to reactivation efforts.
CMS NOMECO has a 33 percent working interest in
Colombia's Espinal block, from which the company's share
of production was 457 barrels of oil per day in 1995. The
company believes the block holds significant upside
exploration potential. Plans call for bringing two additional
fields into production by the second quarter of 1996, and
drilling three exploratory wells.
Domestic Growth
In the U.S., CMS NOMECO expects to increase gas produc-
tion in Michigan and the Gulf of Mexico.
The significant natural gas discovery in Louisiana's
Freshwater Bayou, where the company has a 10 percent work-
ing interest, increased production in 1996. The company's
share of production was about 16.5 million cubic feet per day.
In the Gulf of Mexico, net production to CMS NOMECO
was 5.8 million cubic feet per day and 230 barrels of oil per
day, from six producing blocks. In addition, the company
owns an interest in 17 undeveloped blocks. In 1996, CMS
NOMECO expects to drill at least three exploratory wells.
In 1996, the company expects to grow Michigan Antrim
gas production further, investing $16.2 million to drill about
300 more wells and to construct related facilities.
CMS
MS NOMECO's
presence in the Congo is
Important as it produces
about one tenth of the
country's oil production."
Jerry Livingston
Beoer Manager of
Walter Internabenal Congo, inc.NATURAL GAS TRANSMISSION, STORAGE AND MARKETING
1995 OPERATING HIGHLIGHTS
Increased pretax operating earnings by more than 50 percent.
Arranged the purchase of 101 billion cubic feet of natural gas.
Acquired 25 percent of major Argentine pipeline.
Expanded gas transmission and storage internationally.
Formed electric marketing company.
Gas Marketed
for End-Users
Billions of Cubic Feet
29
14
60
08
101
91 92 93 94 95
Natural Gas
Transmission, Storage
and Marketing Aasets
Dollars in Millions
109
809
91 92 98 94 95
MS Energy's natural gas pipeline and storage busi-
nesses are well on their way to becoming a significant
international gas company. The pretax operating
income of the CMS gas businesses grew by more than 50
percent in 1995, as they positioned themselves for substan-
tial revenue and earnings growth in 1996 and beyond.
In 1995, the CMS gas companies earned their place on
the international map through acquisitions. Their assets
have nearly tripled since 1994.
CMS Gas Transmission and Storage acquired a 25 per-
cent interest in Transportadora de Gas del Norte (TGN),
a major gas pipeline system in northern and central
Argentina. CMS is the largest investor in the company. TGN
owns about 2,700 miles of pipelines, with current annual
revenues of $155 million, and has a large expansion poten.
tial. Servicing areas where gas demand has grown six per-
cent annually since 1980, TGN has contracts to expand its
system capacity by 20 percent over the next three years.
The company announced its first project in Uruguay. CMS
is 30 percent owner in a consortium with exclusive rights to
develop the Santa Lucia natural gas storage project. The
formation could potentially store 40 to 60 billion cubic feet
of gas, and will be connected to Brazilian and Argentine
gas-consuming markets. A feasibility study to determine the
optimal size of storage will be completed in 1996.
In the U.S., CMS purchased the high-deliverability "peak-
ing" Petal Gas Storage facility. The Mississippi facility, with a
working capacity of 3.2 billion cubic feet, is ideally located to
compensate for supply shortfalls, like the one which occurred
earlier this year. Operational since 1994, the facility already
has long-term commitments for half of the storage capacity.
CMS Gas Transmission and Storage is creating synergies
with other CMS Energy companies. In Argentina, for example,
a portion of the planned expansion of the TGN pipeline will
deliver increased gas volumes to CMS Generation's CTM
Mendoza plant.
C
CMS Gas Marketing in 1995 arranged the purchase of 101 billion cubic feet of
gas for its customers.1
In North America, CMS Gas Transmission and Storage
and its partners put the newly constructed Bluewater
Pipeline into service. The pipeline connects the Canadian-
and U.S.-based natural gas systems of Union Gas and
Consumers Power via the CMS Grands Lacs Market Center
at Marysville, Michigan.
In partnership with Nitrotec, the company invested in
three helium removal plants and a nitrogen rejection
plant. The extraction plants recover valuable helium from
noncommercial gas. The rejection plant removes nitrogen
from noncommercial gas to bring the gas up to pipeline
quality. The company subsequently acquired a 50 percent
interest in Nitrotec in January 1996.
In Michigan, CMS expanded the capacity of its Antrim
carbon dioxide extraction facilities to 260 million cubic
feet per day, and increased its ownership to 100 percent.
The complex is the largest of its kind in the state.
CMS Gas Transmission and Storage plans to invest
about $150 million in foreign and domestic projects in
1996, concentrating on nonregulated pipeline and
storage opportunities.
Marketing Segment Grows
CMS Gas Marketing heads into 1996 on the heels of another
very successful year. It arranged the purchase of 101 billion
cubic feet of gas for customers in 1995, 53 percent more than
the previous year. CMS Gas Marketing's throughput rivals the
largest one-third of local distribution companies in the U.S.
CMS Energy expects smaller-volume gas users in the U.S.
to become increasingly eligible to be gas transportation
customers, as larger-volume gas users now are. This should
allow traditional utility customers to purchase natural gas
from any source. thus creating an opportunity for
CMS Gas Marketing - while still purchasing the delivery
service, or transportation, from their local gas utility.
CMS Gas Marketing also sees its gas trading business moving
from trading on a monthly and long-term basis, to
marketing on a short-term, daily basis.
The company's most important growth opportunity will
be the deregulation of the electric industry. In 1995, the
company formed CMS Electric Marketing. In 1996, the com-
pany anticipates involvement in some wholesale electricity
transactions, and has applied for the necessary approvals.
Prior to the complete opening of the electric utility industry,
CMS Electric Marketing will offer a wide range of consulting
and educational services to prepare its end-use customers for
the opportunities deregulation will offer.
"The TGN pipeline is
important to Argentina,
bringing natural gas to
families and businesses
in the northern and
central parts of the
country."
Ralph C. Hesje
Chief Operating Officer
Transportadora de Gas
del NorteMANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION
AND ANALYSIS
CMS Energy Corporation (CMS Energy) is the
parent holding company of Consumers Power
Company (Consumers) and CMS Enterprises
Company (Enterprises). Consumers, a combina-
tion electric and gas utility company serving the
Lower Peninsula of Michigan, is the principal
subsidiary of CMS Energy. Consumers' customer
base includes a mix of residential, commercial
and diversified industrial customers, the largest
segment of which is the automotive industry.
Enterprises is engaged in several domestic and
international energy-related businesses,
including oil and gas exploration and production,
development and operation of independent power
production facilities, electric and gas marketing
services to utility, commercial and industrial
customers, and storage and transmission of
natural gas.
Ifi
CONSOLIDATED EARNINGS
Consolidated net income for 1995 totaled $204 million comprised
of $201 million of net income attributable to one of two classes
of common stock of CMS Energy (CMS Energy Common Stock)
or $2.27 per share compared to net income of $179 million or
$2.09 per share in 1994 and net income of $155 million or $1.90 per
share in 1998. Net income attributable to the other class of com-
mon stock of CMS Energy (Class G Common Stock), which
reflects the separate performance of the gas distribution, storage
and transportation currently conducted by Consumers and
Michigan Gas Storage Company (Consumers Gas Group) totaled
$3 million or $.38 per share in 1995. The improved net income for
1995 reflects increased utility electric sales and utility gas deliv-
eries, increased electric utility revenue as a result of the May
1994 rate increase, reversal of losses previously recorded for gas
utility contingencies (see Note 4), improved operating results
from Consumers' interest in the Midland Cogeneration Venture
Facility, a natural gas-fueled, combined cycle cogeneration
facility (MCV Facility), and the continuing growth of the interna-
tional businesses. For further information, see the Electric
and Gas Utility Results of Operations sections and the individual
international results of operations sections. The increased 1994
net income over the 1993 period reflects a significant increase
in utility electric sales, the impact of the 1994 electric rate
increase, recognition of incentive revenue related to demand-
side management (DSM) programs, the favorable resolution
of a previously recorded gas cost contingency, and the growth
of international businesses.
CASH POSITION, FINANCING AND INVESTING
CMS Energy's primary ongoing source of operating cash is divi-
dends from its subsidiaries. In 1995, CMS Energy received a
$70 million dividend from Consumers compared to $176 million in
1994. This decrease represents Consumers temporarily suspending
its common dividends to CMS Energy in lieu of CMS Energy
making a direct equity infusion of cash into Consumers. In 1996,
Consumers plans to resume common stock dividend payments to
CMS Energy.CMS Energy's consolidated cash from operations is derived
mainly from Consumers' sale and transportation of natural gas,
its generation, transmission, and sale of electricity and CMS
NOMECO Oil & Gas Co.'s (CMS NOMECO) sale of oil and natural
gas. Consolidated cash from operations during 1995 increased
$70 million from the 1994 level primarily from higher sales of
electricity and gas, lower gas inventories, timing of cash pay-
ments related to its utility operations, CMS NOMECO's increased
sale of oil and natural gas and the growth of the international
businesses partially offset by Consumers' higher power purchases
from the MCV Partnership. CMS Energy primarily uses this oper-
ating cash to expand its international businesses, maintain its
electric and gas utility systems, retire portions of its long-term
securities and pay dividends.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities in 1995 increased $163.
million from 1994, primarily reflecting the issuance of Class G
Common Stock and increased long-term debt. Net cash provided
by financing activities in 1994 increased by $214 million primarily
reflecting the issuance of Consumers preferred stock.
In January 1994, CMS Energy filed a shelf-registration state-
ment with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) for
the issuance and sale of up to $250 million of CMS Energy General
Term Notes, Series A (GTNs). As of December 31, 1995, CMS
Energy had issued approximately $221 million of GTNs with
a weighted average interest rate of 7.7 percent.
In the third quarter 1995, CMS Energy received net proceeds
of approximately $123 million from the issuance of 7.52 million
shares of Class G Common Stock at a price to the public of $17.75
per share, initially representing 23.50 percent of the common
stockholder's equity value attributed to the Consumers Gas
Group. All of the proceeds from this sale will fund the capital pro-
grams and be used for general corporate purposes of CMS Energy.
Initially, such proceeds were used to repay a portion of
CMS Energy's indebtedness under the Credit Facility, none of
which was attributable to the Consumers Gas Group. In 1995,
CMS Energy issued approximately $90 million of CMS Energy
Common Stock in conjunction with the acquisitions of Terra
Energy Ltd. (Terra) and Walter International, Inc. (Walter).
In January 1995, CMS Generation Co. (CMS Generation), a
subsidiary of Enterprises, entered into a one-year $118 million
bridge credit facility for the acquisition of HYDRA-CO
Enterprises, Inc. (HYDRA-CO) of which approximately
$109 million remained outstanding as of December 31, 1995. In
January 1996, CMS Generation refinanced the bridge credit facility
into a $110 million, five-year term loan.
During 1995, CMS Energy paid $80 million in cash dividends to
holders of CMS Energy Common Stock compared to $67 million in
1994. The $13 million increase reflects an annual increase of
$.12 per share to $.96 per share, commencing third quarter 1995.
CMS Energy also paid $4 million in cash dividends to holders of
Class G Common Stock. Dividends on preferred stock increased to
$28 million in 1995, reflecting Consumers' issuance of additional
preferred stock in 1994.
In October 1995, CMS NOMECO filled a registration statement
with the SEC for an initial public offering of not more than 20 per-
cent of CMS NOMECO common stock. CMS Energy will continue
to evaluate market conditions for a possible future offering of
CMS NOMECO common stock.
In November 1995, CMS Energy amended the terms of its
$400 million Unsecured Credit Facility, increased the amount to
$450 million and extended the termination date to June 30, 1998.
CMS Energy also entered into a $125 million, seven-year Term
Loan Agreement. As of December 31, 1995, $118 million and
$125 million remains outstanding for the Unsecured Credit
Facility and Term Loan Agreement, respectively.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities in 1995 increased $307 mil-
lion from 1994, primarily reflecting the acquisitions of
Transportadora de Gas del Norte S.A. (TGN), HYDRA-CO and
Walter. Capital expenditures, including assets placed under capi-
tal lease (see Note 17), deferred DSM costs, investment in inter-
national subsidiaries and common stock issued for acquisitions
totaled $1,053 million in 1995 as compared to $672 million in
1994 and $768 in 1993. Capital expenditures for 1995 include
approximately $200 million for acquisitions which commenced in
1994 but did not close until 1995. CMS Energy's expenditures for
its utility, independent power production, oil and gas exploration
and production, and gas transmission and marketing business
segments were $454 million, $239 million, $168 million and
$178 million, respectively.
17Financing and Investing Outlook
CMS Energy estimates that capital expenditures, including new
lease commitments, and investments in partnerships and uncon-
solidated subsidiaries, will total approximately $2.4 billion over
the next three years.
Years Ended December 31
Electric utility
Gas utility
Oil and gas exploration and production
Independent power production
Natural gas transmission,
storage and marketing
1996
$311
124
120
189
112
$856
18
1997
$285
110
135
175
70
$775
In Millions
1998
$295
105
150
150
50
$750
CMS Energy is required to redeem or retire approximately
$1,266 million of long-term debt over the three-year period ending
December 1998. Cash provided by operating activities is expected
to satisfy a substantial portion of these capital expenditures and
debt retirements. In January 1996, Consumers issued and sold
4 million shares of Trust Originated Preferred Securities with net
proceeds totaling $96 million (see Note 8). CMS Energy will con-
tinue to evaluate the capital markets in 1996 as a source of
financing its subsidiaries' investing activities and required
debt retirements.
Consumers has several available, unsecured, committed lines
of credit totaling $145 million and a $425 million working capital
facility. Consumers has Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
(FERC) authorization to issue or guarantee up to $900 million in
short-term debt through December 31, 1996. Consumers uses
short-term borrowings to finance working capital and gas in stor-
age, and to pay for capital expenditures between long-term
financings. Consumers has an agreement permitting the sales
of certain accounts receivable for up to $500 million. At
December 31, 1995 and 1994, receivables sold totaled $295 million
and $275 million, respectively.
ELECTRIC UTILITY RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Pretax Operating Income
Change Compared to Prior Year
Sales
Rate increase and other regulatory issues
Other operation and maintenance
expense (0&M), general taxes and
depreciation
Total change
1995/1994
$50
8
(38)
$30
In Millions
1994/1993
$99
38
(25)
$ 46
Electric Sales: Total electric sales in 1995 were a record
35.5 billion kilowatt-hours (kWh), a 3.0 percent increase from the
1994 level as a result of economic growth and warmer summer
temperatures. The increase in total electric sales included a
4.2 percent increase in sales to Consumers' ultimate customers,
with fairly consistent increases in the residential, commercial, and
industrial sectors. The increase was partially offset by a decrease
in certain sales to other utilities.
Total electric sales in 1994 were 34.5 billion kWh, a 5.2 percent
increase from the 1993 level, which included a 4.2 percent
increase in system sales to Consumers' ultimate customers.
Power Costs: Power costs for 1995 totaled $970 million, a
$20 million increase from the corresponding 1994 period, primar-
ily reflecting increased purchased power costs due to higher sales
levels. Power costs for 1994 totaled $950 million, a $42 million
increase as compared to 1993 which reflects increased kWh pro-
duction at Consumers' generating plants and greater power pur-
chases from outside sources to meet increased sales demand.
Operating Expenses: Electric operation and maintenance
expense for 1995 compared to 1994 increased $13 million, which
included $9 million of additional postretirement benefit costs
and increased expenditures to improve electric system reliability.
Electric depreciation for 1995 compared to 1994 increased
$15 million, reflecting additional property and equipment.
Electric general taxes increased $11 million in 1995 compared to
1994, reflecting millage rate increases and additional capital
investments in property and equipment.ELECTRIC UTILITY ISSUES
Power Purchases from the MCV Partnership: Consumers' annual
obligation to purchase contract capacity from the MCV
Partnership increased 108 megawatts (MW) in 1995 to 1,240 MW.
In 1993, the Michigan Public Service Commission (MPSC) issued
the March 1998 and May 1993 orders (Settlement Order) that have
allowed Consumers to recover substantially all payments for
915 MW of contract capacity purchased from the MCV Partnership.
The Association of Business Advocating Tariff Equity (ABATE)
and the Michigan Attorney General (Attorney General) have
appealed the Settlement Order to the Michigan Court of Appeals
(Court of Appeals). The market for the remaining 325 MW of con-
tract capacity was assessed at the end of 1992. This assessment,
along with the Settlement Order, resulted in Consumers recogniz-
ing a loss for the present value of the estimated future under-
recoveries of power purchases from the MCV Partnership.
Additional losses may occur if actual future experience materially
differs from the 1992 estimates. As anticipated in 1992, Consumers
continues to experience cash underrecoveries associated with the
Settlement Order. These after-tax cash underrecoveries totaled
$90 million, $61 million and $59 million in 1995, 1994 and 1998,
respectively. Estimated future after-tax cash underrecoveries, and
possible losses for 1996 and the next four years are shown in the
table below.
Estimated cash
underrecoveries
Possible additional
1996
$56
1997
$55
1998
$8
After-tax, In Millions
1999 2000
underrecoverles
and losses (a
$20
$22
$72
(a) If unable to sell any capacity above the MPSC's authorized level.
$9
$72
$74
In September 1995, Consumers and the MPSC staff reached a
proposed settlement agreement that would potentially resolve
several issues in three pending proceedings, including cost recovery
for the 325 MW of MCV Facility capacity above the MPSC's cur-
rently authorized level. For further information regarding the
settlement, see Note 4.
In 1994 and 1995, Consumers terminated power purchase
agreements with the developers of a proposed 65 MW coal-fired
cogeneration facility and a proposed 44 MW wood and chipped-
tire plant. To replace this capacity, 109 MW of less expensive con-
tract capacity from the MCV Facility which Consumers is cur-
rently not authorized to recover from retail customers would be
used. For further information, see Note 4.
Electric Rate Proceedings: Consumers filed a request with the
MPSC in late 1994 to increase its retail electric rates. In early
1996, the MPSC granted Consumers authority to increase its
annual electric retail rates by $46 million. This partial final order
did not address cost recovery related to the 325 MW of MCV
Facility contract capacity above 915 MW. The MPSC stated that
this matter would be addressed in connection with its considera-
tion of the proposed settlement agreement discussed below.
In September 1995, Consumers and the MPSC staff reached a
proposed settlement agreement that, if approved by the MPSC,
would resolve several outstanding regulatory issues. One of these
issues, Consumers' electric rate case, was addressed, in part, by
the order discussed above. If fully adopted, the settlement agree-
ment would resolve Consumers' depreciation and special compet-
itive service cases (discussed below) and cost recovery of 325 MW
of uncommitted MCV Facility capacity. Consumers expects a final
order in the spring of 1996. For more information regarding the
electric rate order and the settlement, see Note 4.
In 1995, Consumers filed a request with the MPSC, seeking
approval to increase its traditional depreciation expense by
$21 million and reallocate certain portions of its utility plant from
production to transmission, resulting in a $28 million decrease. If
both aspects of the request are approved, the net result would be
a decrease in electric depreciation expense of $7 million for
ratemaking purposes. The MPSC staff's filing in this case did not
support Consumers' requested increase in depreciation expense,
but instead proposed a decrease of $24 million. The MPSC staff
also did not support the reallocation of plant investment as pro-
posed by Consumers but suggested several alternatives which
could partially address this issue. In September 1995, the
Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) issued a proposal for decision
that essentially supported the MPSC staff's position regarding
depreciation expense and recommended that the MPSC reject
both Consumers' and the MPSC staff's positions regarding the
reallocation of Consumers' depreciation reserve and plant
investment. This case is currently part of the proposed settlement
discussed above.
19Special Rates: Consumers currently has a request before the
MPSC that, if approved, would allow Consumers a certain level of
rate-pricing flexibility to respond to customers' alternative energy
options. This request has been consolidated into the settlement
proceeding discussed above.
Electric Conservation Efforts: In June 1995, the MPSC issued
an order that authorized Consumers to discontinue future DSM
program expenditures and cease all new programs. For further
information, see Note 4.
Electric Environmental Matters: The 1990 federal Clean Air
Act as amended on November 15, 1990 (Clean Air Act) signifi-
cantly increased the environmental constraints that utilities will
operate under in the future. While the Clean Air Act's provisions
require Consumers to make certain capital expenditures in order
to comply with the amendments for nitrogen oxide reductions,
Consumers' generating units are presently operating at or near
the sulfur dioxide emission limits which will be effective in the
year 2000. Therefore, management believes that Consumers'
annual operating costs will not be materially affected.
The Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental
Protection Act (formerly the Michigan Environmental Response
Act) was substantially amended in June 1995. The Michigan law
bears similarities to the Federal Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation and Liability Act (Superfund). The pur-
pose of the 1995 amendments was generally to encourage devel-
opment of industrial sites and to remove liability from some
parties who were not responsible for activities causing contami-
nation. Consumers expects that it will ultimately incur costs at a
number of sites. Consumers believes costs incurred for both
investigation and required remedial actions are properly
recoverable in rates.
Consumers is a so-called "potentially responsible party" at sev-
eral sites being administered under Superfund. Along with
Consumers, there are numerous credit worthy, potentially respon-
sible parties with substantial assets cooperating with respect to
the individual sites. Based on current information, management
believes it is unlikely that Consumers' liability at any of the
known Superfund sites, individually or in total, will have a mater-
ial adverse effect on its financial position, liquidity or results of
operations. For further information regarding electric
environmental matters, see Note 14.
20
ELECTRIC OUTLOOK
Competition: Consumers currently expects approximately 2 per-
cent average annual growth in electric system sales over the next
five years.
Consumers continues to be affected by the developing compet-
itive market for electricity. The primary sources of competition
include: the installation of cogeneration or other self-generation
facilities by Consumers' larger industrial customers; the forma-
tion of municipal utilities which would displace retail service
by Consumers to an entire community; and competition from
neighboring utilities which offer flexible rate arrangements
designed to encourage movement to their respective service
areas. Consumers continues to work toward retaining its current
retail service customers.
In an effort to meet the challenge of competition, Consumers
has signed long-term sales contracts with some of its largest
industrial customers, including its largest customer, General
Motors Corporation. Under the General Motors contract,
Consumers will serve certain facilities at least five years and other
facilities at least 10 years in exchange for competitively dis-
counted electric rates. Certain facilities will have the option of
taking retail wheeling service (if available) after the first three
years of the contract. The MPSC approved this contract in 1905.
As part of an order issued in early 1996, the MPSC significantly
reduced the rate subsidization of residential customers by indus-
trial and large commercial customers. In addition to offering elec-
tric rates that are competitive with other energy providers,
Consumers is pursuing other strategies to retain its "at-risk" cus-
tomers. These strategies include: minimizing outages for each
customer, promptly responding to customer inquiries, and provid-
ing consulting services to help customers use energy efficiently.
In 1994, the MPSC approved a framework for a five-year exper-
imental retail wheeling program for Consumers and The Detroit
Edison Company (Detroit Edison). Under the experiment, up to
60 MW of Consumers' additional load requirements could be met
by retail wheeling. The program becomes effective uponConsumers' next solicitation for capacity. In June 1995, the MPSC
issued an order that set rates and charges for retail delivery ser-
vice under the experiment. Consumers, ABATE and The Dow
Chemical Company filed claims of appeal of the MPSC's retail
wheeling orders. The Court of Appeals subsequently consolidated
these appeals with those previously filed by Detroit Edison and
the Attorney General. Consumers does not expect this short-term
experiment to have a material impact on its financial position,
liquidity or results of operations.
In March 1995, the FERC Issued a notice of proposed rulemak-
ing (NOPR) and a supplemental NOPR that propose changes in
the wholesale electric industry. Among the most significant pro-
posals is a requirement that utilities provide open access to the
domestic interstate transmission grid. The FERC's final rules are
expected to be announced in the spring of 1996. Consumers is
unable to predict the terms of these rules. However, management
believes that Consumers is well-positioned to conform to open
access as it has been voluntarily providing this transmission
service since 1992.
The Governor of the State of Michigan has proposed that the
MPSC review the existing statutory and regulatory framework
governing Michigan utilities in light of increasing competition in
the utility industry and recommend appropriate revisions. At this
time, no proceedings have been initiated at the MPSC on this
matter and no new legislation has been introduced.
Changes in the competitive environment facing regulated util-
ities may eventually lead to the discontinuance of Statement of
Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) 71, which allows the
deferral of certain costs and the recording of regulatory assets.
Management has evaluated Consumers' current regulatory posi-
tion and believes it continues to support the recognition of
Consumers' $779 million of electric-related regulatory assets. If
changes in the industry were to lead to Consumers discontinuing
the application of SFAS 71, for all or part of its business,
Consumers may be required to write-off the portion of any regula-
tory asset for which no regulatory assurance of recovery contin-
ued to exist. Consumers does not believe that there is any current
evidence that supports the write-off of any of its electric-related
regulatory assets. For further information regarding SFAS 71 and
Consumers' regulatory assets, see Notes 2 and 19.
Nuclear Matters: In July 1995, the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission (NRC) issued its Systematic Assessment of Licensee
Performance report for the Palisades nuclear plant (Palisades).
The report recognized improved performance at the plant, specifi-
cally in the areas of Engineering and Plant Operations. In the
report, the NRC noted areas which continue to require manage-
ment's attention, but also recognized the development and
implementation of plans for corrective action designed to address
previously identified weak areas. The report noted that perfor-
mance in the areas of Maintenance and Plant Support was good
and remained unchanged.
Consumers' on-site storage pool for spent nuclear fuel at
Palisades is at capacity. Consequently, Consumers is using NRC-
approved dry casks, which are steel and concrete vaults, for tem-
porary on-site storage. In 1996, Consumers plans to unload and
replace one of the casks where a minor flaw has been detected.
For further information, see Note 15.
The Low-Level Radioactive Waste Policy Act encourages the
respective states, individually or in cooperation with each other,
to be responsible for the disposal of low-level radioactive waste.
Currently, a low-level waste site does not exist in Michigan and
Consumers has been storing low-level waste at its nuclear plant
sites. Consumers began shipping its low-level waste to a site in
South Carolina during 1995 and plans to have all its currently
stored low-level waste removed from the plant sites by the end
of 1996.
Consumers is required to make certain calculations and report
to the NRC about the continuing ability of the Palisades reactor
vessel to withstand postulated "pressurized thermal shock"
events during its remaining license life. Analysis of recent data
from testing of similar materials indicates that the Palisades
reactor vessel can be safely operated through late 1999.
Consumers is developing plans to anneal the reactor vessel in
1998 at an estimated cost of $20 million to $30 million. This repair
would allow for operation of the plant to the end of its license life
in the year 2007. Consumers cannot predict whether the studies
being conducted as a part of the development plans will support a
future decision to anneal.
21At the SEC staff's request, the Financial Accounting
Standards Board (FASB) is reviewing the accounting for closure
and removal costs for long-lived assets, including decommission-
ing. The current electric utility industry accounting practices of
recording the cost of removal as a component of depreciation
could be changed. The FASB's tentative decision includes recog-
nition of the cost of closure and removal obligation as a liability
based on discounted future cash flows with the offset recorded as
part of the cost of the plant asset.
Stray Voltage: Consumers has experienced a number of law-
suits relating to the effect of so-called stray voltage on certain
livestock. At December 31, 1995, Consumers had 30 separate stray
voltage lawsuits awaiting trial court action, down from 83 law-
suits at December 31, 1994. CMS Energy believes that the resolu-
tion of these lawsuits will not have a material impact on its
financial position or results of operations.
GAS UTILITY RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Pretax Operating Income
Change Compared to Prior Year
Sales
Regulatory recovery of gas cost
O&M, general taxes and depreciation
Total change
1995/1994
$12
19
(15)
22
$ 16
In Millions
1994/1998
$ (8)
10
(19)
$(12)
Gas Deliveries: Gas sales in 1995 totaled 253.6 billion cubic feet
(bef), a 5.2 percent increase from 1994 levels, and total system
deliveries, excluding transport to the MCV Facility, increased
6.5 percent from 1994. On a weather-adjusted basis, total system
deliveries increased 4.1 percent, reflecting significant growth. In
1994, total system deliveries, excluding transport to the MCV
Facility, were 314 bof, a slight decrease from 1993 deliveries.
Cost of Gas Sold: cost of gas sold for 1995 increased
$9 million from the 1994 level, as a result of increased deliveries.
The increased costs reflect the reversal of a $23 million gas sup-
plier loss contingency,
Operating Expenses: Gas operation and maintenance expense
increased $12 million, reflecting an $8 million gas inventory
loss. Gas depreciation for 1995 compared to 1994 increased
$7 million, reflecting additional capital investment in property
and equipment,
GAS UTILITY ISSUES
Gas Rates: In December 1994, Consumers filled a request with the
MPSC to increase Consumers' annual gas rates. The requested
increase reflected increased expenditures, including those asso-
ciated with postretirement benefits, and a 13 percent return on
equity. The MPSC staff has recommended a $13 million rate
decrease. In November 1995, the ALJ issued a proposal for deci-
sion that essentially adopted the MPSC staff's position.
Consumers currently requests a $7 million increase in its annual
gas rates. A final order from the MPSC is expected in early 1996.
For further information regarding Consumers' current gas rate
case, see Note 4.
Consumers entered into a special natural gas transportation
contract with one of its transportation customers in response to
the customer's proposal to by-pass Consumers' system in favor of
a competitive alternative. The contract provides for discounted
gas transportation rates in an effort to induce the customer to
remain on Consumers' system. In February 1995, the MPSC
approved the contract but stated that the revenue shortfall
created by the difference between the contract's discounted rate
and the floor price of one of Consumers' MPSC authorized gas
transportation rates must be borne by Consumers' shareholders.
In March 1995, Consumers filed an appeal with the Court of
Appeals claiming that the MPSC decision denies Consumers the
opportunity to earn its authorized rate of return and is therefore
unconstitutional.
Gas Cost Recovery Matters: In October 1995, the MPSC issued
an order regarding a $44 million (excluding any interest) gas sup-
ply contract pricing dispute between Consumers and certain
intrastate producers. The order stated that Consumers was not
obligated to seek prior approval of market-based pricing provi-
sions that were implemented under the contracts in question.
The producers subsequently filed a claim of appeal of the MPSC
order with the Court of Appeals. Consumers believes the MPSC
order supports its position that the producers' theories are with-
out merit and intends to vigorously oppose any claims they may
raise but cannot predict the outcome of this issue.
Gas Environmental Matters: Consumers expects that it will
ultimately incur investigation and remedial action costs at a num-
ber of sites, including some that formerly housed manufactured
gas plant facilities. Data available to Consumers and itscontinued internal review of these former manufactured gas plant
sites have resulted in an estimate for all costs related to investi-
gation and remedial action of between $48 million and $112 mil-
lion. These estimates are based on undiscounted 1995 costs. At
December 31, 1995, Consumers has accrued a liability for $48 mil-
lion and has established a regulatory asset for approximately the
same amount. Any significant change in assumptions such as
remediation technique, nature and extent of contamination and
regulatory requirements, could impact the estimate of remedial
action costs for the sites.
Consumers requested recovery and deferral of certain investi.
gation and remedial action costs in its gas rate case filed in
December 1994. Consumers believes that remedlal action costs
are recoverable in rates and is continuing discussions with cer-
tain insurance companies regarding coverage for some or all of
the costs which may be incurred for these sites. For further
information, see Note 14.
GAS OUTLOOK
Consumers currently anticipates gas deliveries to grow approxi-
mately 2 percent per year (excluding transportation to the MCV
Facility and off-system deliveries) over the next five years, primar-
ily due to a steadily growing customer base. Additionally,
Consumers has several strategies which will support increased
load requirements in the future. These strategies include
increased efforts to promote natural gas to both current and
potential customers that are using other fuels for space and water
heating. The emerging use of natural gas vehicles also provides
Consumers with sales growth opportunities. In addition, as air
quality standards continue to become more stringent, manage-
ment believes that greater opportunities exist for converting
industrial boiler load and other processes to natural gas.
Consumers also plans additional capital expenditures to construct
new gas mains that are expected to expand Consumers' system.
In 1995, Consumers purchased approximately 80 percent of its
required gas supply under long-term contracts, and the balance
on the spot market. Consumers estimates that approximately
35 percent of its gas purchases will be under long-term contracts in
future years as current contracts expire. Consumers also has
transmission contracts totaling approximately 90 percent of its
supply requirements. The expiration dates of the transmission
contracts range from 1997 to 2004.
In 1995, the Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program
provided approximately $71 million in heating assistance to about
400,000 Michigan households, with approximately 18 percent of
funds going to Consumers' customers. In late 1995, federal legisla-
tive approval provided Michigan residents with approximately
$60 million of funding for 1996. Consumers cannot predict what
level of funding will be approved for 1997.
In January 1996, the MPSC issued a Notice of legislative-type
hearings to be held February 12, 1996, to assess whether it is
appropriate to allow all natural gas customers access to gas trans-
portation service. The MPSC notice designated all eight local dis-
tribution companies whose rates are regulated by the MPSC as
parties to this proceeding.
Under SFAS 71, Consumers is allowed to defer certain costs
to the future and record regulatory assets, based on the recover-
ability of those costs through the MPSC's approval. Consumers
has evaluated its $276 million of regulatory assets (see Note 19)
related to its gas business, and believes that sufficient regula-
tory assurance exists to provide for the recovery of these
deferred costs.
OIL AND GAS EXPLORATION AND PRODUCTION
Pretax Operating Income: 1995 pretax operating income
increased $22 million from 1994, primarily due to higher sales vol-
umes and oil sales prices, income attributable to the acquisitions
of Walter and Terra and increased gains from the assignment of
gas supply contracts, partially offset by lower average market
prices for gas. 1994 pretax operating income increased $5 million
from 1993, reflecting higher gas sales volumes, lower interna-
tional write-offs, and the gain from the disposition of a gas supply
contract, partially offset by lower average market prices for oil
and gas.
Capital Expenditures: In February 1995, CMS NOMECO
closed on the acquisition of Walter for approximately $49 million,
consisting of approximately $27 million of CMS Energy Common
Stock and $22 million in both cash and assumed debt. The Walter
acquisition added proved reserves of approximately 20 million
barrels of oil.
28In August 1995, CMS NOMECO acquired Terra with approxi-
mately $63 million of CMS Energy Common Stock. The Terra
acquisition added approximately 96 bef of proved gas reserves.
Other capital expenditures for 1995 approximated $84 million,
primarily for development of existing oil and gas reserves.
INDEPENDENT POWER PRODUCTION
Pretax Operating Income: 1995 pretax operating income
increased $25 million, primarily reflecting higher capacity sales
by the MCV Partnership, as well as additional equity earnings by
CMS Generation subsidiaries primarily due to the HYDRA-CO
acquisition. 1994 pretax operating income increased
$16 million from 1998, primarily reflecting additional electric
generating capacity.
Capital Expenditures: In January 1995, CMS Generation com-
pleted its acquisition of HYDRA-CO for $153 million, net of
$54 million cash. CMS Generation acquired 224 MW of net
generating capacity and also assumed shared construction man-
agement responsibility for a 60 MW diesel-fueled plant under con-
struction in Jamaica, scheduled to go into service in the fourth
quarter of 1996.
Other capital expenditures for 1995 totaled approximately
$86 million related to expanding ownership in existing facilities
and investments in new facilities.
NATURAL GAS TRANSMISSION, STORAGE AND MARKETING
Pretax Operating Income: 1995 pretax operating income
increased $5 million over 1994, reflecting growth from new
pipeline investments and the continued growth of existing pro-
jects and gas marketed to end-users. 1994 pretax operating
income increased $2 million over 1993, reflecting earnings growth
from gas pipeline and storage projects and gas marketed to end.
users. In 1995, 101 bef of natural gas was marketed compared to
66 bcf and 60 bef in 1994 and 1993, respectively.
Capital Expenditures: In July 1995, CMS Gas Transmission
and Storage Company (CMS Gas Transmission), a subsidiary of
Enterprises, acquired a 25 percent ownership interest in TGN for
$136 million. TGN, which had 1995 revenues of approximately
$150 million, owns and operates 2,600 miles of pipelines that pro-
vide natural gas transmission service to the northern and central
parts of Argentina, with almost one bcf per day of existing
pipeline capacity.
24
CMS Gas Transmission, through an ownership interest in
Nitrotec Corporation, a proprietary gas technology company
acquired in January 1996, currently has two helium recovery
plants under construction, with the first plant scheduled to be in
service in the first quarter of 1996. The total estimated cost for
these two plants, both located in Kansas, is $8.2 million. One
helium recovery plant was placed in service in October 1995.
Nitrotec Corporation has also started construction on a $5.2 million
nitrogen rejection facility in Texas.
In January 1996, CMS Gas Transmission signed a letter of
intent to transfer its 50 percent ownership interest to its partner,
MHP Corporation, in the Moss Bluff Gas Storage System,
a salt cavern storage facility on the Gulf Coast of Texas and MHP
Corporation will transfer its 50 percent ownership interest to
CMS Gas Transmission in the Grand Lacs Limited Partnership, a
marketing center for natural gas. CMS Gas Transmission will also
receive approximately $26 million.
In January 1996, CMS Gas Transmission acquired Petal Gas
Storage Company, a natural gas storage facility located in Forrest
County, Mississippi. The salt dome storage cavern provides up
to 3.2 bcf per day of 10-day storage service and has the capability
of being refilled in 20 days.
Other capital expenditures in 1995 totaled approximately
$42 million for acquisitions, expansion of existing facilities and
construction of new facilities.
OTHER
New Accounting Standard: In 1995, the FASB issued SFAS 121,
Accounting for the Impairment of Long-Lived Assets and for
Long-Lived Assets to Be Disposed Of, which is effective for 1996.
CMS Energy does not expect the application of this statement to
have a material impact on its financial position, liquidity or
results of operations. For further information, see Note 2.
iCONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF INCOME
Years Ended December 31
Operating Revenue
Operating Expenses
Pretax Operating
Income (Loss)
Income Taxes
Net Operating Income
Other Income
(Deductions]
Fixed Charges
Electric utility
Gas utility
Oil and gas exploration and production
Independent power production()
Natural gas transmission, storage and marketing)
Other
Total operating revenue
Operation
Fuel for electric generation
Purchased power -related parties
Purchased and interchange power
Cost of gas sold
Other
Maintenance
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
General taxes
Total operating expenses
Total operation
Electric utility
Gas utility
Oil and gas exploration and production
Independent power production
Natural gas transmission, storage and marketing
Other
Total pretax operating income
Accretion income (Note 2)
Accretion expense (Note 2)
Other income taxes, net
Bond income
Other, net
Total other income
Interest on long-term debt
Other interest
Capitalized interest
Preferred dividends
Average Common Shares Outstanding
Net Income
Net Income Attributable to Common Stocks
CMS Energy
Class G
Earnings Per Average Common Share
Net fixed charges
CMS Energy
Class G
CMS Energy
Class G
Dividends Declared Per Common Share
CMS Energy
Class G
1995
$2,277
1,195
108
96
196
18
3,890
288
491
196
821
698
2,489
186
416
×258÷±| 88€ =@212ª
3,287
362
151
603
130
473
(31)
224
27
(8)
28
271
$ 204
$ 201
$
3
89
8
$ 2.27
$ 38
$ .90
$ 56
CMS Energy Corporation
In Millions, Except Per Share Amounts
1994
1993
$2,189
1,151
78
46
145
5
3,614
306
482
162
785
621
2,356
192
379
184
3,111
332
135
8
21
9
(2)
503
103
400
18
(85)
11
19
8
193
18
(6)
24
229
$ 179
$ 179
86
$ 2.09
$ .78
$2,077
1,160
71
21
142
5
3,476
293
467
148
801
565
2,274
206
364
193
3,097
286
147
8
5
7
(9)
439
81
358
14
(36)
6
32
15
31
204
24
11
284
$ 155
$ 155
81
$ 1.90
.60
(4) Does not include revenue associated with CMS' interests in unconsolidated partnerships. For 1995, 1994 and 1998, that revenue totaled $497 million, $985 million and $394 million,
respectively, for independent power production and $26 million, $7 million and $3 million, respectively, for natural gas transmission, storage and marketing.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these statements.
25CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
December 31
ASSETS
Plant and Property
(At Cost)
Investments
Current Assets
Non-current Assets
Total Assets
20
Electric
Gas
Oil and gas properties (full-cost method)
Other
Less accumulated depreciation, depletion and amortization (Note 2)
Construction work-in-progress
Independent power production
First Midland Limited Partnership (Notes 3 and 20)
Natural gas transmission, storage and marketing
Midland Cogeneration Venture Limited Partnership (Notes 3 and 20)
Other
Cash and temporary cash investments at cost,
which approximates market
Accounts receivable and accrued revenue,
less allowances of $4 in 1995 and $5 in 1994 (Note 6)
Inventories at average cost
Gas in underground storage
Materials and supplies
Generating plant fuel stock
Deferred income taxes (Note 5)
Prepayments and other
Postretirement benefits (Note 12)
Nuclear decommissioning trust funds (Note 2)
Abandoned Midland project
Other
CMS Energy Corporation
1995
$6,103
2,218
1,074
105
9,500
4,627
4,873
201
5,074
275
225
193
103
22
818
66
206
184
83
37
24
230
910
462
304
131
444
1,341
$8,143
In Millions
1994
$5,771
2,102
934
61
8,868
4,299
4,569
245
4,814
152
218
40
74
16
500
79
156
235
75
37
34
216
832
478
218
147
894
1,232
$7,378December 31
STOCKHOLDERS' INVESTMENT AND LIABILITIES
Capitalization
Current Liabilities
Non-current
Liabilities
Common stockholders' equity
Preferred stock of subsidiary
Long-term debt (Note 7)
Non-current portion of capital leases (Note 13)
Current portion of long-term debt and capital leases
Notes payable
Accounts payable
Accrued taxes
Power purchases - settlement (Note 3)
Accounts payable-related parties
Accrued interest
Accrued refunds
Other
Deferred income taxes (Note 5)
Postretirement benefits (Note 12)
Power purchases - settlement (Note 3)
Deferred investment tax credits
Regulatory liabilities for income taxes, net (Notes 5 and 19)
Other
Commitments and Contingencies (Notes 2, 3, 4, 13, 14 and 15)
Total Stockholders' Investment and Liabilities
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these statements.
CMS Energy Corporation
1995
$1,469
356
2,906
106
4,837
207
341
304
256
90
53
45
22
192
1,510
640
533
221
171
44
187
1,796
$8,143
In Millions
1994
$1,107
356
2,709
108
4,280
64
339
194
216
95
50
40
25
198
1,221
582
544
324
181
16
280
1,877
$7,378
27CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
Years Ended December 31
Cash Flows From
Operating Activities
Cash Flows From
Investing Activities
Cash Flows From
Financing Activities
Net income
Adjustments to reconcile net income to net
cash provided by operating activities
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
(includes nuclear decommissioning
depreciation of $51, $49 and $46,
respectively)
28
Capital lease amortization
Debt discount amortization
Deferred income taxes and investment tax credit
Accretion expense (Note 2)
Accretion income
abandoned
Midland project (Note 2)
Power purchases-settlement (Note 3)
Undistributed earnings of related parties
Changes in other assets and liabilities (Note 17)
Other
Net cash provided by operating activities
Capital expenditures (excludes capital lease additions
of $31, $36 and $58, respectively and DSM) (Note 17)
Investments in partnerships
and unconsolidated subsidiaries
Acquisition of companies, net of cash acquired
Investments in nuclear decommissioning trust funds
Cost to retire property, net
Deferred demand-side management costs
Proceeds from sale of property
Proceeds from sale of bond investments
Sale of subsidiary
Other
Net cash used in investing activities
Proceeds from bank loans, notes and bonds
Issuance of common stock
Increase in notes payable, net
Payment of common stock dividends
Retirement of bonds and other long-term debt
Payment of capital lease obligations
Repayment of bank loans
Retirement of common stock
Issuance of preferred stock
Net cash provided by (used in)
financing activities
Net Increase [Decrease) In Cash and Temporary Cash Investments
Cash and temporary cash investments
Beginning of year
End of year
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these statements.
1995
$ 204
416
37
24
75
31
(11)
(137)
(53)
89
7
682
(535)
(242)
(146)
(51)
(41)
(9)
22
| 1 3 9 88 ~
(14)
(1,016)
160
(84)
(44)
(37)
(18)
(1)
311
(23)
79
$ 56
CMS Energy Corporation
1994
$ 179
68588
(13)
(87)
(25)
(575)
(52)
(49)
(38)
(9)
20
11
(6)
(709)
701
30
80
(67)
(279)
(35)
(473)
(2)
198
148
51
28
$ 79
In Millions
1998
$ 155
*-***
(14)
(84)
(9)
(88)
(550)
(108)
(46)
(32)
(52)
6
322
(14)
(5)
(479)
673
132
44
(49)
(645)
(26)
(192)
(8)
(66)
(61)
80
$ 28CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF PREFERRED STOCK
December 31
Consumers'
Preferred Stock
Consumers'
Class A Preferred Stock
Total Preferred Stock
(c) Redeemable beginning April 1, 1999.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these statements.
Balance at January 1, 1993
Cumulative, $100 par
value, authorized
7,500,000 shares,
with no mandatory
redemption
Cumulative, no par
value, authorized
16,000,000 shares,
with no mandatory
redemption**
Balance at December 31, 1993
Net income
Common stock:
Balance at December 31, 1994
Dividends declared
Reacquired
Issued
Reissued
Net income
Common stock:
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY
Dividends declared
Reacquired
Issued
Reissued
Net income
Common stock:
Dividends declared:
CMS Energy
Class G
Reacquired
Issued:
CMS Energy
Class G(*)
Series
Reissued
Change in unrealized
investment-loss
$4.16
4.50
7.45
7.68
7.72
7.76
Number
of Shares
79,965,722
(97,442)
5,135,726
192,789
85,196,795
2.08
(85,174)
1,389,578
33,350
86,534,549
(21,514)
5,039,019
41,447
Optional
Redemption
Price
$103.25
110.00
101.00
101.00
101.00
102.21 308,072
Common
Stock
$1
25.00 8,000,000 8,000,000
1
1995
Balance at December 31, 1995
91,593,501
$1
(a) Number of Class G common shares issued during 1995 and outstanding at December 31, 1995 was 7,618,602.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these statements.
68,451
68,451
378,148
373,148
379,549 379,549
207,565
207,565
289,642 289,642
308,072
Number of Shares
1994
Other
Paid-In Revaluation
Capital
Capital
$1,589
$-
(8)
182
4
1,672
(2)
30
1,701
(1)
126
124
1
$1,951
CMS Energy Corporation
(8)
$(8)
1995
87
38
21
20
31
103
193
$356 $356
In Millions, Except Number of Shares
Retained
Earnings
(Deficit)
$(813)
155
CMS Energy Corporation
(49)
(707)
179
(67)
(595)
204
In Millions
1994
37
38
21
(80)
(4)
$(475)
29
31
Total
$ 727
155
(49)
(8)
132
966
179
(67)
(2)
1,107
204
(80)
(4)
(1)
126
124
1
(8)
$1,469
29NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
1: CORPORATE STRUCTURE
CMS Energy Corporation (CMS Energy) is the parent holding
company of Consumers Power Company (Consumers) and CMS
Enterprises Company (Enterprises). Consumers, a combination
electric and gas utility company serving the Lower Peninsula of
Michigan, is the principal subsidiary of CMS Energy. Consumers'
customer base includes a mix of residential, commercial and
diversified industrial customers, the largest segment of which is
the automotive industry. Enterprises is engaged in several domes-
tic and international energy-related businesses, including oil and
gas exploration and production, development and operation of
independent power production facilities, electric and
gas marketing services to utility, commercial and industrial
customers, and storage and transmission of natural gas.
2: SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
AND OTHER MATTERS
Basis of Presentation: The consolidated financial statements
include CMS Energy, Consumers and Enterprises and their wholly
owned subsidiaries. The financial statements are prepared in
conformity with generally accepted accounting principles and
include the use of management's estimates. CMS Energy uses the
equity method of accounting for investments in companies and
partnerships where it has more than a 20 percent but less than a
majority ownership interest and includes these results in
operating income. For the years ended December 31, 1995, 1994
and 1998, undistributed equity earnings were $53 million,
$25 million and $9 million, respectively.
Accretion Income and Expense: In 1991, the Michigan Public
Service Commission (MPSC) ordered that Consumers could
recover a portion of its abandoned Midland investment over a
10-year period, but did not allow Consumers to earn a return on
that amount. Consumers reduced the recoverable investment to
the present value of the future recoveries. During the recovery
period, the unrecovered asset is adjusted to its present value. This
adjustment is reflected as accretion income. Conversely,
Consumers recorded a loss in 1992 for the present value of its esti-
mated future underrecoveries of power costs resulting from pur-
chases from the Midland Cogeneration Venture Limited
Partnership (MCV Partnership) (see Note 3), and now recognizes
accretion expense annually to reflect the time value of money on
the recorded loss.
Gas Inventory: Consumers uses the weighted average cost
method for valuing working gas inventory. Cushion gas, which is
gas stored to maintain reservoir pressure for recovery of working
gas, is recorded in the appropriate gas utility plant account.
Consumers stores gas inventory in its underground storage facilities.
90
CMS Energy Corporation
Maintenance, Depreciation and Depletion: Property repairs
and minor property replacements are charged to maintenance
expense. Depreciable property retired or sold plus cost of removal
(net of salvage credits) is charged to accumulated depreciation.
Consumers bases depreciation provisions for utility plant on
straight-line and units-of-production rates approved by the MPSC.
The composite depreciation rate for electric utility property was
3.5 percent for 1995, 3.5 percent for 1994 and 3.4 percent for 1993.
The composite rate for gas utility plant was 4.3 percent for 1995,
4.2 percent for 1994 and 4.4 percent for 1993. The composite rate
for Consumers' other plant and property was 4.9 percent for 1995
and 4.7 percent for 1994 and 1993.
CMS NOMECO Oil & Gas Co. (CMS NOMECO), a wholly owned
subsidiary of Enterprises, follows the full-cost method of account-
ing and, accordingly, capitalizes its exploration and development
costs, including the cost of non-productive drilling and surren-
dered acreage, on a country-by-country basis. The capitalized
costs in each cost center are being amortized on an overall
units-of-production method based on total estimated proved oil
and gas reserves. Other depreciable property of CMS Energy and
its subsidiaries is amortized over its estimated useful life.
New Accounting Standard: During 1995, the Financial
Accounting Standards Board issued Statement of Financial
Accounting Standards (SFAS) 121, Accounting for the
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets and for Long-Lived Assets to
Be Disposed Of. This statement, which is effective for 1996 finan-
cial statements, requires that an asset be reviewed for impair-
ment whenever events indicate that its carrying amount may not
be recoverable. The statement also requires that a loss be recog-
nized whenever a portion of an asset's cost is excluded from a
rate-regulated company's rate base. CMS Energy does not expect
the application of this statement to have a material impact on its
financial position or results of operations.
Nuclear Fuel Cost: Consumers amortizes nuclear fuel cost to
fuel expense based on the quantity of heat produced for electric
generation. Interest on leased nuclear fuel is expensed as
incurred. Under federal law, the U.S. Department of Energy
(DOE) is responsible for permanent disposal of spent nuclear fuel
at costs to be paid by affected utilities. However, in 1994, the DOE
asserted that it does not have a legal obligation to accept spent
nuclear fuel without an operational repository. In 1995, federal
legislation was introduced to clarify the DOE's obligation to
accept spent nuclear fuel and direct the DOE to establish an inte-
grated spent fuel management system that includes designing
and constructing an interim storage facility in Nevada. For fuel
used after April 6, 1983, Consumers charges disposal costs to
nuclear fuel expense, recovers them through electric rates and
remits to the DOE quarterly. Consumers elected to defer paymentfor disposal of spent nuclear fuel burned before April 7, 1983,
until the spent fuel is delivered to the DOE, which was originally
scheduled to occur in 1998. At December 31, 1995, Consumers has
recorded a liability to the DOE of $100 million, including interest.
Consumers recovered through electric rates the amount of this
liability, excluding a portion of interest.
Nuclear Plant Decommissioning: Consumers collects approx-
imately $45 million annually from its electric customers to
decommission its two nuclear plants. On March 1, 1995,
Consumers filed updated decommissioning information with the
MPSC which estimated decommissioning costs for the Big Rock
Point nuclear plant (Big Rock), owned by Consumers, and the
Palisades nuclear plant (Palisades), owned by Consumers, to be
$303 million and $524 million (in 1995 dollars), respectively. The
estimated decommissioning costs increased from previous esti-
mates principally due to the unavailability of low- and high-level
radioactive waste disposal facilities. Amounts collected from
electric retail customers and deposited in trusts (including trust
earnings) are credited to accumulated depreciation. To meet
Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) decommissioning
requirements, Consumers prepared site-specific decommission-
ing cost estimates for Big Rock and Palisades, assuming that each
plant site will eventually be restored to conform with the adja-
cent landscape, and that all contaminated equipment will be dis-
assembled and disposed of in a licensed burial facility. After the
plants are retired, Consumers plans to maintain the facilities in
protective storage until radioactive waste disposal facilities are
available. As a result, the majority of decommissioning costs will
be incurred several years after each plant's NRC operating license
expires. When Big Rock's and Palisades' NRC licenses expire in
2000 and 2007, respectively, the trust funds are estimated to have
accumulated to $257 million and $686 million, respectively. It is
estimated that at the time the plants are fully decommissioned
(in the years 2030 for Big Rock and 2046 for Palisades), the trust
funds will have provided $1 billion for Big Rock and $2.1 billion
for Palisades including trust earnings over this decommissioning
period. Based on this plan, Consumers believes that the current
decommissioning surcharge will be sufficient to provide for
decommissioning of its nuclear plants. At December 31, 1995,
Consumers had an investment in nuclear decommissioning trust
funds of $304 million.
Reclassifications: CMS Energy has reclassified certain prior
year amounts for comparative purposes. These reclassifications
did not affect the net income for the years presented.
Related-Party Transactions: In 1995, 1994 and 1993,
Consumers purchased $59 million, $48 million and $52 million,
respectively, of electric generating capacity and energy from affil-
lates of Enterprises. Affiliates of CMS Energy sold, stored and
transported natural gas and provided other services to the
MCV Partnership totaling approximately $26 million, $22 million
and $27 million for 1995, 1994 and 1993, respectively. For addi-
tional discussion of related-party transactions with the
MCV Partnership and the First Midland Limited Partnership
(FMLP), see Notes 3 and 20. Other related-party transactions
are immaterial.
Revenue and Fuel Costs: Consumers accrues revenue for elec-
tricity and gas used by its customers but not billed at the end of
an accounting period. Consumers accrues or reduces revenue for
any underrecovery or overrecovery of electric power supply costs
and natural gas costs by establishing a corresponding asset or
liability until it bills or refunds these differences to customers
following an MPSC order.
Utility Regulation: Consumers accounts for the effects of reg-
ulation under SFAS 71, Accounting for the Effects of Certain
Types of Regulation. As a result, the actions of regulators affect
when revenues, expenses, assets and liabilities are recognized.
Other: For significant accounting policies regarding income
taxes, see Note 5; for pensions and other postretirement benefits,
see Note 12; and for cash equivalents, see Note 17.
3: THE MIDLAND COGENERATION VENTURE
The MCV Partnership, which leases and operates the natural
gas-fueled, combined cycle cogeneration facility (MCV Facility),
contracted to sell electricity to Consumers for a 35-year period
beginning in 1990 and to supply electricity and steam to The
Dow Chemical Company. Consumers, through its subsidiaries,
holds the following assets related to the MCV Partnership and
MCV Facility: 1) CMS Midland Inc. (CMS Midland) owns a
49 percent general partnership interest in the MCV Partnership;
and 2) CMS Midland Holdings Company (CMS Holdings)
holds through the FMLP a 35 percent lessor interest in the
MCV Facility.
Power Purchases from the MCV Partnership: Consumers'
annual obligation for purchase of contract capacity from the MCV
Partnership under a 35-year power purchase agreement (PPA)
increased 108 megawatts (MW) to its maximum amount of 1,240
MW in 1995. The March 1998 and May 1993 orders issued by the
MPSC (Settlement Order) allowed Consumers to recover substan-
tially all of the payments for its ongoing purchase of 915 MW of
contract capacity. The Association of Businesses Advocating
Tariff Equity (ABATE) and the Michigan Attorney General
(Attorney General) have appealed the Settlement Order to the
Michigan Court of Appeals (Court of Appeals). Under the
Settlement Order, capacity and energy purchases from the MCV
Partnership above the 915 MW level can be utilized to satisfy cus-
tomers' power needs but the MPSC will determine the levels of
81recovery from retail customers at a later date. The Settlement
Order also provides Consumers the right to remarket to third par-
ties the remaining contract capacity. The MCV Partnership did
not object to the Settlement Order.
The PPA provides that Consumers is to pay the MCV
Partnership a minimum levelized average capacity charge of
3.77 cents per kilowatt-hour (kWh), a fixed energy charge and a
variable energy charge which is based primarily on Consumers'
average cost of coal consumed. The Settlement Order permits
Consumers to recover capacity charges averaging 3.62 cents per
kWh for 915 MW of capacity, the fixed energy charge and the pre-
scribed energy charges associated with the scheduled deliveries
within certain hourly availability limits, whether or not those
deliveries are scheduled on an economic basis. For all energy
delivered on an economic basis above the availability limits to
915 MW, Consumers has been allowed to recover 1/2 cent per kWh
capacity payment in addition to the variable energy charge.
In 1992, Consumers recognized a loss for the present value of
the estimated future underrecoveries of power costs under the
PPA as a result of the Settlement Order. This loss was based, in
part, on management's assessment of the future availability of the
MCV Facility, and the effect of the future power market on the
amount, timing and price at which various increments of the
capacity, above the MPSC authorized level, could be resold.
Additional losses may occur if actual future experience materially
differs from the 1992 estimates. As anticipated in 1992, Consumers
continues to experience cash underrecoveries associated with the
Settlement Order. If Consumers is unable to sell any capacity
above the current MPSC-authorized level, future additional after-
tax losses and after-tax cash underrecoveries would be incurred.
Consumers' estimates of its future after-tax cash underrecoveries,
and possible losses for 1996 and the next four years are shown in
the table below.
1996
82
1997
$56
Estimated cash
underrecoveries
Possible additional
underrecoveries
and losses (*)
(a) If unable to sell any capacity above the MPSC's authorized level.
$20
$22
$72
1998
$55
Aftertar, In Millions
1999 2000
$8
$72
$74
In September 1995, Consumers and the MPSC staff reached a
proposed settlement agreement that would potentially resolve
several issues in three pending proceedings, including cost recov-
ery for the 325 MW of MCV Facility capacity above the MPSC's
currently authorized level. For further information regarding this
proposed settlement, see Note 4.
At December 31, 1995 and 1994, the after-tax present value of
the Settlement Order liability totaled $202 million and $272 mil-
lion, respectively. The reduction in the liability since December 31,
1994, reflects after-tax cash underrecoveries of $90 million,
partially offset by after-tax accretion expense of $20 million. The
undiscounted after-tax amount associated with the liability
totaled $607 million at December 31, 1995.
In 1994 and 1995, Consumers paid $44 million to terminate
power purchase agreements with the developers of two proposed
independent power projects totaling 109 MW. As part of the pro-
posed settlement reached with the MPSC staff (see Note 4),
Consumers is seeking MPSC approval to utilize less-expensive
contract capacity from the MCV Facility which Consumers is cur-
rently not authorized to recover from retail customers. Cost
recovery for this contract capacity would start in late 1996. Even
if Consumers is not allowed to substitute MCV Facility capacity
for the capacity to be provided under the terminated agreements,
Consumers believes that the MPSC would approve recovery of the
buyout costs due to the significant customer savings resulting
from the terminated power purchase agreements. As a result,
Consumers has recorded a regulatory asset of $44 million.
Power Supply Cost Recovery Matters Related to Power
Purchases from the MCV Partnership: As part of the 1993 and
1994 plan case orders, the MPSC confirmed the recovery of cer-
tain costs related to power purchases from the MCV Partnership.
ABATE or the Attorney General has appealed these plan case
orders to the Court of Appeals.
As part of its decision in the 1993 Power Supply Cost Recovery
(PSCR) reconciliation case issued February 23, 1995, the MPSC
disallowed a portion of the costs related to purchases from the
MCV Partnership, and instead assumed recovery of those
costs from wholesale customers and reduced recovery from retail
customers. Consumers believes this is contrary to the terms of
the Settlement Order and has appealed the February 23 order
on this issue.
4: RATE MATTERS
Electric Rate Proceedings: In late 1994, Consumers filed a
request with the MPSC to increase its retail electric rates. The
request included provisions for ratemaking treatment of expected
sales losses to competition and the treatment of the 325 MW of
MCV Facility contract capacity above 915 MW. Consumers also
requested that the MPSC eliminate subsidization of residential
rates in a two-step adjustment.
Early in 1996, the MPSC issued a partial final order in this
case, granting Consumers a $46 million annual increase in itselectric retail rates. This order authorized a 12.25 percent return
on equity as compared to the previously approved 11.75 percent,
approved recovery of certain costs associated with a proposed
settlement related to the Ludington pumped storage plant
(Ludington), jointly owned by Consumers and The Detroit Edison
Company (Detroit Edison) (see Note 14), and significantly
reduced (in a two-step adjustment) the subsidization of residen-
tial customers by industrial and large commercial customers.
As a result, residential customers were allocated approximately
$31 million of the $46 million increase.
This order did not address cost recovery related to the 325 MW
of MCV Facility contract capacity above 915 MW. The MPSC stated
that this matter would be addressed in connection with its consid-
eration of the proposed settlement agreement discussed below.
Consumers also has a separate request before the MPSC to
offer competitive special rates to certain large qualifying cus-
tomers. In addition, Consumers filed a request with the MPSC,
seeking to adjust its depreciation rates and to reallocate certain
portions of its electric production plant to transmission accounts.
If approved, this would result in a net decrease in depreciation
expense of $7 million for ratemaking purposes. For further
information regarding these requests, see the Electric Rate
Proceedings and Special Rates discussions in the Management's
Discussion and Analysis.
In September 1995, Consumers and the MPSC staff reached a
proposed settlement agreement that, if approved by the MPSC,
would resolve several outstanding regulatory issues currently
before the MPSC in separate proceedings. Some of these issues
were preliminarily addressed in early 1996 when the MPSC issued
an order in Consumers' electric rate case (see above). If fully
adopted, the settlement agreement would: provide for cost recovery
of the 325 MW of uncommitted MCV Facility capacity; implement
provisions for incentive ratemaking; resolve the special competitive
services and depreciation rate cases; implement a limited direct
access program; and accelerate recovery of nuclear plant
investment. Consumers expects a final order in the spring of 1996.
Electric Demand-side Management: In June 1995, the MPSC
authorized Consumers to discontinue future demand-side man-
agement (DSM) program expenditures and cease all new pro-
grams. Consumers is deferring and amortizing past program costs
($68 million at December 31, 1995) over the period these costs
are being recovered from customers in accordance with an MPSC
accounting order.
Gas Rates: As part of an agreement approved by the MPSC,
Consumers filed a gas rate case in December 1994. The request,
among other things, incorporated cost increases, including costs
for postretirement benefits and costs related to Consumers'
former manufactured gas plant sites and proposed a 13 percent
rate of return on equity, instead of the current 13.25 percent.
Consumers currently requests a $7 million increase in its annual
gas rates. The MPSC staff supports a $13 million rate decrease,
which includes a lower rate base, a lower return on common
equity, a revised capital structure and a lower operating cost
forecast than Consumers had projected. In November 1995, the
Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) issued a proposal for decision
that essentially adopted the MPSC staff's position. Consumers
expects an MPSC decision in early 1996.
Gas Cost Recovery Matters: In 1993, the MPSC issued a ruling
favorable to Consumers regarding a gas pricing disagreement
between Consumers and certain intrastate producers. In 1995,
management concluded that the intrastate producers' pending
appeals of the MPSC order would not be successful and accord-
ingly reversed $23 million (pretax) of a previously accrued loss.
The MPSC ruling was affirmed by the Court of Appeals in June
1995. The producers have petitioned the Michigan Supreme
Court for review.
In October 1995, the MPSC issued an order regarding a
$44 million (excluding any interest) gas supply contract pricing
dispute between Consumers and certain intrastate producers.
The order stated that Consumers was not obligated to seek prior
approval of market-based pricing provisions that were imple-
mented under the contracts in question. The producers subse-
quently filed a claim of appeal of the MPSC order with the Court
of Appeals. Consumers believes the MPSC order supports its posi-
tion that the producers' theories are without merit and intends to
vigorously oppose any claims they may raise but cannot predict
the outcome of this issue.
Estimated losses for certain contingencies discussed in this
note have been accrued. Resolution of these contingencies
is not expected to have a material impact on CMS Energy's or
Consumers' financial position or results of operations.
5: INCOME TAXES
CMS Energy and its subsidiaries (including Consumers) file a
consolidated federal income tax return. Income taxes are gener-
ally allocated based on each subsidiary's separate taxable
income. CMS Energy and Consumers practice full deferred tax
accounting for temporary differences.
CMS Energy uses investment tax credits (ITC) to reduce cur-
rent income taxes payable and defers and amortizes ITC over the
life of the related property. Any alternative minimum tax (AMT)
paid generally becomes a tax credit that can be carried forward
indefinitely to reduce regular tax liabilities in future periods
when regular taxes paid exceed the tax calculated for AMT.
33The significant components of income tax expense (benefit)
consisted of:
Years Ended December 31
Current federal income taxes
Deferred income taxes
Deferr come taxes tax rate change
Deferred ITC, net
Operating
Other
December 31
Property
Unconsolidated investments
Postretirement benefits (Note 12)
Abandoned Midland project
Employee benefit obligations (includes
postretirement benefits
of $175 and $174) (Note 12)
Power purchases --settlement (Note 3)
AMT carryforward
ITC carryforward (expires 2005)
Other
Gross deferred tax liabilities
Gross deferred tax assets
Years Ended December 31
Net income before preferred dividends
Income tax expense
Statutory federal income tax rate
Expected income tax expense
Increase (decrease) in taxes from:
Capitalized overheads previously flowed
through
Differences in book and tax depreciation
not previously deferred
ITC amortization
1995
$ 43
85
Nonconventional Fuel Tax Credit
Other, net
(10)
34
$118
$130
(12)
$118
The principal components of CMS Energy's deferred tax assets
(liabilities) recognized in the balance sheet are as follows:
1994
$36
66
-
5
(10)
6
(10)
(13)
7
$118
$ 92
$103
In Millions
1993
$ 19
67
(1)
(10)
(11)
$ 92
The actual income tax expense differs from the amount com-
puted by applying the statutory federal tax rate to income before
income taxes as follows:
204
112
1995
1994
$232
$203
118
92
350
295
x 35% x 35%
123
108
In Millions
1994
1995
$ (603) $ (601)
(266) (246)
(173)
(177)
(46)
(51)
$75
$81
(6)
203
146
161
154
23
37
(28)
(13)
$ (616) $ (548)
$(1,698) $(1,659)
1,082 1,111
$ (616) $ (548)
5
$75
7
(10)
(8)
(5)
$92
In Millions
1998
$166
75
241
x 35%
84
5
5
(10)
(6)
(3)
$75
6: SHORT-TERM FINANCINGS
Consumers has Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC)
authorization to issue or guarantee up to $900 million of short-
term debt through December 31, 1996. Consumers has an unse-
cured $425 million facility and unsecured, committed lines of
credit aggregating $145 million that are used to finance seasonal
working capital requirements. At December 31, 1995, $238 mil-
lion and $103 million were outstanding under these facilities at
weighted average interest rates of 6.4 percent and 6.9 percent,
respectively. Consumers has an established $500 million trade
receivables purchase and sale program. At December 31, 1995
and 1994, receivables sold under the agreement totaled $295 mil-
lion and $275 million, respectively. Accounts receivable and
accrued revenue in the Consolidated Balance Sheets have been
reduced to reflect receivables sold.
7: LONG-TERM DEBT
At December 31, 1995 and 1994, long-term debt consists of the
following:
In Millions
1905
Maturing Expiring Interest Rate
1994
1996 to 2023 5.875% to 8.875% $1,341 $1,341
1999
6.2%(⁰)
400
400
December 31
First Mortgage Bonds
Long-Term Bank Debt
Sr. Deferred
Coupon Notes
General Term Notes
Bank Loans
Pollution Control
Revenue Bonds
Term Loan Agreement
Unsecured Credit Facility
Revolving Line of Credit
Nuclear Fuel Disposal
Senior Serial Notes
Other
1997 and 1999
1997 to 2002
1996 to 2006
2000 to 2018
2002
1998
1999
1998
Principal Amount Outstanding
Current Amounts
9.5% and 9.875%
7.7%(*)
8.01%(a)
5.9%()
7.7%(ª)
7.63%(*)
7.13%
5.5%
Net Unamortized Discount
Total Long-Term Debt
(a)Represents the weighted average interest rate during 1995.
347
355
221 94
177 21
131 131
125
118 196
112 89
100
95
36
6
-
4
3,076 2,764
(161) (21)
(0) (34)
$2,906 $2,709
The scheduled maturities of long-term debt and improvement
fund obligations are as follows: $161 million in 1996, $325 million
in 1997, $803 million in 1998, $716 million in 1999 and $10 million
in 2000.
CMS Energy
In January 1994, CMS Energy filed a shelf-registration statement
with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) permitting
the issuance and sale of up to $250 million of CMS Energy Series
A General Term Notes (GTNs). The GTNs are offered from time to
time on terms determined at the time of sale.In 1994, CMS Energy refinanced its $220 million Secured
Revolving Credit Facility dated November 30, 1992 with a $400
million Unsecured Revolving Credit Facility dated July 29, 1994
(Unsecured Credit Facility) and extended the termination date to
June 30, 1997. In November 1995, CMS Energy amended the
terms of its $400 million Unsecured Credit Facility, increased
the amount to $450 million and extended the termination date
to June 30, 1998. CMS Energy also entered into a $125 million,
seven-year Term Loan Agreement dated November 21, 1995.
Consumers
First Mortgage Bonds: Consumers secures its first mortgage
bonds by a mortgage and lien on substantially all of its property.
Consumers' ability to issue and sell securities is restricted by cer-
tain provisions in its First Mortgage Bond Indenture, its Articles
of Incorporation (Articles) and the need for regulatory approvals
in compliance with appropriate federal law.
Long-Term Bank Debt: During 1994, Consumers entered into a
$400 million unsecured, variable rate, five-year term loan and
subsequently used the proceeds to refinance certain long-term
bank debt. In 1993, Consumers entered into an interest rate swap
agreement, exchanging variable-rate interest for fixed-rate inter-
est on $250 million of its long-term bank debt. The swap agree-
ment hedges the variable rate exposure associated with
Consumers' long-term bank debt. The swap agreement began to
decrease in February 1995 and will terminate by May 1996. At
December 31, 1995, the amount of the swap totaled $94 million at
5.4 percent. The swap agreement had the effect of decreasing the
weighted average interest rate to 6.3 percent from 6.6 percent for
the 12-month period ended December 31, 1995.
Other: Consumers' long-term Pollution Control Revenue Bonds
are secured by irrevocable letters of credit or first mortgage bonds.
CMS NOMECO
CMS NOMECO's existing Revolving Line of Credit, which converts
to term loans maturing from November 1996 through November
1999, was increased from $110 million at December 31, 1994 to
$140 million at December 31, 1995.
Senior serial notes amounting to $28 million, with a weighted
average interest rate of 9.40 percent, were repaid in full on
August 10, 1995. In connection with this early extinguishment
of debt, CMS NOMECO incurred a $1.5 million prepayment
premium. The notes were retired with available proceeds from
the bank credit line.
CMS Generation
In January 1995, CMS Generation Co. (CMS Generation), a sub-
sidiary of Enterprises, entered into a one-year $118 million bridge
credit facility for the acquisition of HYDRA-CO Enterprises, Inc.
of which approximately $109 million remained outstanding as of
December 31, 1995. In January 1996, CMS Generation refinanced
this bridge facility with a $110 million, five-year term loan.
8: CAPITALIZATION
CMS Energy
Capital Stock: During 1995, CMS Energy amended its Articles of
Incorporation and authorized a new class of common stock of
CMS Energy (Class G Common Stock), which reflects the sepa-
rate performance of the gas distribution, storage and transporta-
tion businesses of Consumers and Michigan Gas Storage
Company, a subsidiary of Consumers (Consumers Gas Group). The
pre-existing common stock (CMS Energy Common Stock) contin-
ues to be outstanding and reflects the performance of all of the
businesses of CMS Energy and its subsidiaries, including the busi-
ness of the Consumers Gas Group, except for the interest in the
Consumers Gas Group attributable to the outstanding shares of
the Class G Common Stock. The filing of the restated Articles of
Incorporation with the Michigan Department of Commerce
increased the number of authorized shares of capital stock from
255 million shares to 320 million shares, consisting of 250 million
shares of CMS Energy Common Stock, par value $.01 per share, 60
million shares of Class G Common Stock, no par value, and 10 mil-
lion shares of Preferred Stock, par value $.01 per share.
CMS Energy filed a shelf-registration statement with the SEC
on February 15, 1995 covering the issuance of up to $200 million
of securities encompassing CMS Energy Common Stock and
Class G Common Stock (Common Stock), Preferred Stock of
CMS Energy or of a special purpose affiliate of CMS Energy,
and/or unsecured debt of CMS Energy. CMS Energy continually
evaluates the capital markets and may offer such securities from
time to time, at terms to be determined at or prior to the time of
the sale. In the third quarter 1995, CMS Energy received net pro-
ceeds of approximately $123 million from the issuance of 7.52 mil-
lion shares of Class G Common Stock at a price to the public of
$17.75 per share, initially representing 23.50 percent of the com-
mon stockholder's equity value attributed to the Consumers Gas
Group. All of the proceeds will fund the capital programs and be
used for general corporate purposes of CMS Energy. Initially, such
proceeds were used to repay a portion of CMS Energy's indebted-
ness under the Credit Facility, none of which is attributable to the
Consumers Gas Group. The issuance of additional shares, during
1995, increased the common stockholder's equity value attribut-
able to the Consumers Gas Group represented by the outstanding
3.5shares of Class G Common Stock, to 28.73 percent as of
December 31, 1995.
Other: Under its most restrictive borrowing arrangement at
December 31, 1995, none of CMS Energy's net income was
restricted for payment of common dividends.
Consumers
Capital Stock: During 1995, the MPSC issued an order authoriz-
ing Consumers to issue and sell up to $300 million of intermediate
and/or long-term debt and $100 million of preferred stock or
subordinate debentures. In January 1996, 4 million shares of
8.36 percent Trust Originated Preferred Securities were issued and
sold through a business trust wholly owned by Consumers. The
trust was formed for the sole purpose of issuing preferred securi-
ties and the only asset of the trust is $103 million of 8.36 percent
unsecured subordinated deferrable interest notes issued by
Consumers. The obligations of Consumers with respect to the
preferred securities under the notes that mature in 2015, the
indenture under which the notes will be issued, Consumers'
guarantee of the preferred securities and the Declaration of
Trust, taken together, constitute a full and unconditional guaran-
tee by Consumers of the trust's obligations under the Trust
Originated Preferred Securities. Net proceeds from the sale
totaled $96 million.
Other: Under the provisions of its Articles at December 31,
1995, Consumers had $197 million of unrestricted retained
earnings available to pay common dividends.
CMS NOMECO
In February 1995, CMS Energy acquired Walter International, Inc.
(Walter), a Houston-based independent oil company, for approxi-
mately $49 million, consisting of approximately $27 million of
CMS Energy Common Stock and $22 million in cash and assumed
debt. Walter was merged with a wholly owned subsidiary of
CMS NOMECO.
In August 1995, CMS Energy acquired 100 percent of the com-
mon stock of Terra Energy Ltd. (Terra), a gas exploration company,
located in Traverse City, Michigan for approximately $63 million.
Terra has become a wholly owned subsidiary of CMS NOMECO.
In October 1995, CMS NOMECO filed a registration statement
with the SEC for an initial public offering of not more than 20 per-
cent of CMS NOMECO common stock. CMS Energy will continue
to evaluate market conditions for a possible future offering of
CMS NOMECO common stock.
36
9: EARNINGS PER SHARE AND DIVIDENDS
Earnings per share attributable to Common Stock, for the year
ended December 31, 1995 reflect the performance of the
Consumers Gas Group since initial issuance of Class G Common
Stock during the third quarter of 1995. The Class G Common Stock
participates in earnings and dividends from the issue date. The
allocation of earnings (loss) attributable to each class of common
stock and the related amounts per share are computed by consid-
ering the weighted average number of shares outstanding.
Earnings (loss) attributable to outstanding Class G Common
Stock are equal to Consumers Gas Group net income (loss) multi-
plied by a fraction, the numerator is the weighted average number
of shares of Class G Common Stock outstanding during the period
(Outstanding Shares) and the denominator represents the
weighted average number of Outstanding Shares and Retained
Interest Shares, shares not held by the holders of the Out-
standing Shares, during the period. The earnings attributable to
Class G Common Stock on a per share basis, for the year ended
December 31, 1995, are based on 23.45 percent of the income of
the Consumers Gas Group since the initial issuance.
Earnings per share for Class G Common Stock are omitted from
the statements of income for the years ended December 31, 1994
and 1993, since the Class G Common Stock was not part of the
equity structure of CMS Energy. For purpose of analysis, following
are pro forma data for the years ended December 31, 1995 and 1994
which give effect to the issuance and sale of 7.52 million shares of
Class G Common Stock (representing 23.50 percent of the equity
attributable to the Consumers Gas Group) on January 1, 1994.
Years Ended December 31
Net Income
Net Income attributable to CMS Energy
Common Stock
Net Income attributable to outstanding
Class G Common Stock
Average shares outstanding:
CMS Energy Common Stock
Class G Common Stock
Earnings per share attributable to
CMS Energy Common Stock
Earnings per share attributable to
outstanding Class G Common Stock
In Millions, Except Per Share Amounts
Pro Forma Pro Forma
1995
1994
$ 204
$ 179
$ 189
$ 15
88.810
7.536
$2.14
$1.98
$ 167
$ 12
85.888
7.520
$1.94
$1.66Holders of Class G Common Stock have no direct rights in the
equity or assets of the Consumers Gas Group, but rather have
rights in the equity and assets of CMS Energy as a whole. In the
sole discretion of the Board of Directors of CMS Energy (Board of
Directors), dividends may be paid exclusively to the holders of
Class G Common Stock, exclusively to the holders of CMS Energy
Common Stock, or to the holders of both classes in equal or
unequal amounts. The Board of Directors has stated its intention
to declare and pay dividends on the CMS Energy Common Stock
based primarily on the earnings and financial condition of
CMS Energy. Dividends on the Class G Common Stock are paid at
the discretion of the Board of Directors based primarily upon the
earnings and financial condition of the Consumers Gas Group,
and to a lesser extent, CMS Energy as a whole. It is the Board of
Directors' current intention that the declaration or payment of
dividends with respect to the Class G Common Stock will not be
reduced, suspended or eliminated as a result of factors arising
out of or relating to the electric utility business or the interna-
tional businesses of CMS Energy unless such factors also require,
in the Board of Directors' sole discretion, the omission of the dec-
laration or reduction in payment of dividends on both the
CMS Energy Common Stock and the Class G Common Stock.
The Board of Directors declared a dividend on CMS Energy
Common Stock of $.21 per share for the first and second quarters
and $.24 per share for the third and fourth quarters of 1995. A div-
idend on Class G Common Stock of $.28 per share was declared by
the Board of Directors for the third and fourth quarters of 1995.
10: FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
The carrying amounts of cash, short-term investments and cur-
rent liabilities approximate their fair values due to their short-
term nature. The estimated fair values of long-term investments
are based on quoted market prices or, in the absence of specific
market prices, on quoted market prices of similar investments or
other valuation techniques. The carrying amounts of all long-term
investments in financial instruments approximate fair value.
The carrying amount of long-term debt was $2.9 billion and
$2.7 billion at December 31, 1995 and 1994, respectively, and
the fair value was $3.0 billion and $2.6 billion on those dates.
Although the current fair value of the long-term debt may differ
from the current carrying amount, settlement of the reported
debt is generally not expected until maturity.
The fair values of CMS Energy's off-balance-sheet financial
instruments are based on the amounts estimated to terminate or
settle the instruments. At December 31, 1995, the fair value of
CMS Energy's interest rate swap agreements was $16 million, rep-
resenting the amount that CMS Energy would pay to terminate
the agreements. At December 31, 1994, CMS Energy would have
received $5 million to terminate the agreements. Guarantees and
letters of credit were $148 million and $123 million at December 31,
1995 and 1994, respectively.
In 1994, CMS Energy adopted SFAS 115, Accounting for
Certain Investments in Debt and Equity Securities, which did
not materially impact CMS Energy's financial position or results
of operations.
11: EXECUTIVE INCENTIVE COMPENSATION
Under CMS Energy's Performance Incentive Stock Plan, restricted
shares of common stock of CMS Energy, stock options and stock
appreciation rights may be granted to key employees based on
their contributions to the successful management of CMS Energy
and its subsidiaries. During 1995, shareholders approved amend-
ments to the CMS Energy Performance Incentive Stock Plan. The
amendments authorized awards under the plan consisting of any
class of common stock of CMS Energy and established perfor-
mance based business criteria for certain plan awards. The
amendments also increased the number of shares reserved for
award to not more than 3 percent of each class of CMS Energy
common stock outstanding on January 1 each year, less the num-
ber of shares of restricted common stock awarded and of common
stock subject to options granted under the plan during the imme-
diately preceding four calendar years. Any forfeitures are subject
to award under the plan. At December 31, 1995, awards of up to
1,174,388 shares of CMS Energy Common Stock and 211,634
shares of Class G Common Stock may be issued.
Restricted shares of common stock are outstanding shares
with full voting and dividend rights. Shares of restricted common
stock cannot be distributed until they are vested and the perfor-
mance objectives are met. Further, the restricted stock is subject
to forfeiture if employment terminates before vesting. If key
employees exceed performance objectives, the plan will allow
additional awards. Restricted shares vest fully if control of
CMS Energy changes, as defined by the plan. At December 31,
1995, 475,447 shares of the 517,447 restricted shares outstanding
are subject to performance objectives.
Consumers' Executive Stock Option and Stock Appreciation
Rights Plan, an earlier plan approved by shareholders, expired in
September 1995.
Under both plans, for stock options and stock appreciation
rights, the exercise price on each grant date equaled the closing
market price on the grant date. Options are exercisable upon
grant and expire up to 10 years and one month from date of grant.
The status of the restricted stock granted under the Performance
Incentive Stock Plan and options granted under both plans follows.
37CMS Energy Common
Stock Outstanding
at January 1, 1993
Granted
Exercised or Issued
Canceled
Outstanding at
December 31, 1999
Granted
Exercised or Issued
Canceled
Outstanding at
December 31, 1994
Granted
Exercised or Issued
Canceled
Outstanding at
December 31, 1995
Restricted
Stock
Number
of Shares
323,266
132,000
(54,938)
(84,141)
38
816,187
133,500
(39,361)
(79,970)
330,356
253,337
(43,939)
(22,307)
517,447
Number
of Shares
Options
Price
per Share
1,435,091 $7.13-$34.25
249,000 $25.13-$26.25
(152,125) $7.13-$21.13
(33,000) $20.50-$33.88
1,592,000 $13.00-$34.25
During 1995, 6,924 restricted shares and 10,000 options of
Class G Common Stock were granted at a price of $17.88.
1,498,066 $7.13-$34.25
278,000 $21.25-$22.38
(158,900) $7.13-$22.00
(123,000) $26.25-$33.88
1,490,666 $7.13-$94.25
304,000 $23.25-$34.25
(147,666) $7.13-$22.00
(55,000) $20.50-$34.25
12: RETIREMENT BENEFITS
Postretirement Benefit Plans Other Than Pensions: CMS Energy
and its subsidiaries adopted SFAS 106, Employers' Accounting
for Postretirement Benefits Other than Pensions, effective as of
the beginning of 1992 and Consumers recorded a liability of
$466 million for the accumulated transition obligation and a corre-
sponding regulatory asset for anticipated recovery in utility rates
(see Note 19). CMS Energy's international subsidiaries expensed
their accumulated transition obligation liability. The amount of
such transition obligation is not material to the presentation of
the consolidated financial statements or significant to
CMS Energy's total transition obligation. Both the MPSC and
FERC have generally allowed recovery of SFAS 106 costs. In May
1994, the MPSC authorized recovery of the electric utility portion
of these costs over 18 years. During 1995, the FERC granted
Consumers a waiver of a three-year filing requirement for cost
recovery with respect to its wholesale electric business, which at
December 31, 1995, had recorded a regulatory asset and liability
of $7 million. In December 1994, Consumers requested that the
MPSC approve recovery of the gas utility portion of these costs
(see Note 4). CMS Energy funds the benefits using external
Voluntary Employee Beneficiary Associations, a legal entity,
established under guidelines of the Internal Revenue Code,
through which the company can provide certain benefits for its
employees or retirees. Funding of the health care benefits
coincides with Consumers' recovery in rates. A portion of the life
insurance benefits have previously been funded.
Retiree health care costs at December 31, 1995, are based on
the assumption that costs would increase 9.5 percent in 1996,
then decrease gradually to 6 percent in 2004 and thereafter. The
health care cost trend rate assumption significantly affects the
amounts reported. For example, a 1 percentage point increase
in each year's estimated health care cost assumption would
increase the accumulated postretirement benefit obligation as of
December 31, 1995 by $80 million and the aggregate of the service
and interest cost components of net periodic postretirement
benefit costs for 1995 by $9 million.
Years Ended December 31
Weighted average discount rate
Expected long-term rate of return
on plan assets
1995
7.50%
Years Ended December 31
Service cost
Interest cost
Actual return on assets
Net amortization and deferral
Net postretirement benefit costs
7.00% 7.00%
1995
$11
40
1994
8.00%
Net postretirement benefit costs for the health care benefits
and life insurance benefits consisted of:
1
$48
Actuarial present value of estimated benefits
Retirees
Eligible for retirement
Active (upon retirement)
Accumulated postretirement benefit obligation
Plan assets (primarily stocks, bonds and money
market investments) at fair value
Accumulated postretirement benefit obligation
in excess of plan assets
Unrecognized net loss from experience
different than assumed
Recorded liability
1994
$18
41
| |
$54
1995
$ 331
46
200
677
1993
7.25%
The funded status of the postretirement benefit plans is rec-
onciled with the liability recorded at December 31 as follows:
In Millions
1994
78
8.50%
In Millions
1993
$13
38
(499)
$51
$ 338
44
170
552
36
(516)
1
4
$(498) $(512)CMS Energy's postretirement health care plan is partially
funded; the accumulated postretirement benefit obligation for
that plan is $562 million and $536 million at December 31, 1995
and 1994, respectively.
Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan: Certain manage-
ment employees qualify to participate in the Supplemental
Executive Retirement Plan (SERP), SERP benefits, which are
based on an employee's years of service and earnings as defined in
the SERP, are paid from a trust established and funded in 1988.
Because the SERP is not a qualified plan under the Internal
Revenue Code, earnings of the trust are taxable and trust assets
are included in consolidated assets. At December 31, 1995 and
1994, trust assets at cost (which approximates market) were
$28 million and $19 million, respectively, and were classified as
other non-current assets.
Defined Benefit Pension Plan: A trusteed, non-contributory,
defined benefit pension plan (Pension Plan) covers substantially
all employees. The benefits are based on an employee's years of
accredited service and earnings, as defined in the plan, during
an employee's five highest years of earnings. Because the plan
was fully funded, no contributions were made in 1993 and 1994.
A contribution of $9 million was made in 1995.
Years Ended December 31
Discount rate
Rate of compensation increase
4.50%
Expected long-term rate of return on assets 9.25%
1995 1994 1993
7.50% 8.00% 7.25%
4.50% 4.50%
9.25% 8.75%
Net Pension Plan and SERP costs consisted of:
Years Ended December 31
Service cost
Interest cost
Actual return on plan assets
Net amortization and deferral
Net periodic pension cost
PA
1995
$ 23
56
(168)
103
$ 14
1994
$ 24
51
21
(85)
$ 11
In Millions
1998
$ 19
50
(92)
34
$ 11
The funded status of the Pension Plan and SERP reconciled to
the pension liability recorded at December 31 was:
Actuarial present value of
estimated benefits
Vested
Non-vested
Accumulated benefit obligation
Provision for future pay increases
Projected benefit obligation
Plan assets (primarily stocks
and bonds, including $104
in 1995 and $79 in 1994 in
common stock of CMS Energy)
at fair value
Projected benefit obligation
less than (in excess of)
plan assets
Unrecognized net (gain)
loss from experience
different than assumed
Unrecognized prior service cost
Unrecognized net transition
(asset) obligation
Recorded liability
Pension Plan
1005 1994
$496
74
570
183
753
779
26
(69)
43
$421
61
482
154
636
637
1
(85)
40
1995
$ 20
1
21
18
34
In Millions
SERP
(34)
7
2
(32) (39)
$(32) $(33) $(25)
1994
$ 17
17
11
28
(28)
5
2
1
$(20)
Beginning January 1, 1986, the amortization period for the
Pension Plan's unrecognized net transition asset is 16 years and
11 years for the SERP's unrecognized net transition obligation.
Prior service costs are amortized on a straight-line basis over the
average remaining service period of active employees.
13: LEASES
CMS Energy, Consumers, and Enterprises lease various assets,
including vehicles, rail cars, aircraft, construction equipment,
computer equipment, nuclear fuel and buildings. Consumers'
nuclear fuel capital leasing arrangement is scheduled to expire in
November 1997 and provides for additional one-year extensions
upon mutual agreement by the parties. Upon termination of the
lease, the lessor would be entitled to a cash payment equal to its
remaining investment, which was $65 million as of December 31,
1995. Consumers is responsible for payment of taxes,
maintenance, operating costs, and insurance.
80Minimum rental commitments under CMS Energy's non-
cancelable leases at December 31, 1995, were:
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001 and thereafter
Total minimum lease payments
Less imputed interest
Present value of net minimum lease payments
Less current portion
Non-current portion
Capital
Leases
$ 55
56
17
14
13
24
179
27
152
46
$106
In Millions
Operating
Leases
6
4
3
18
$45
Consumers recovers these charges from customers and
accordingly charges payments for its capital and operating leases
to operating expense. Operating lease charges, including charges
to clearing and other accounts as of December 31, 1995, 1994 and
1998, were $11 million, $10 million and $10 million, respectively.
Capital lease expenses for the years ended December 31, 1995,
1994 and 1993 were $46 million, $43 million and $34 million,
respectively. Included in these amounts for the years ended 1995,
1994 and 1998 are nuclear fuel lease expenses of $25 million,
$21 million and $13 million, respectively.
40
14: COMMITMENTS, CONTINGENCIES AND OTHER
Ludington Pumped Storage Plant: Early in 1996, the FERC and
MPSC approved the recovery of costs associated with a settlement
designed to resolve all legal issues related to fish mortality at
Ludington, Consumers, Detroit Edison, the Attorney General, the
Michigan Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and certain
other parties agreed to the terms of the settlement in 1994. Approval
of the settlement requires Consumers to transfer certain land
to the State of Michigan and the Great Lakes Fishery Trust, make
certain recreational improvements, and incur future annual pay-
ments of approximately $1 million (over 24 years) to improve
fishery resources. The settlement resolves two lawsuits filed
by the Attorney General in 1986 and 1987 on behalf of the
State of Michigan.
Environmental Matters: Consumers is a so-called "Potentially
Responsible Party" at several sites being administered under the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and
Liability Act (Superfund). Superfund liability is joint and several
and along with Consumers, there are numerous credit-worthy,
potentially responsible parties with substantial assets cooperat-
ing with respect to the individual sites. Based upon past
negotiations, Consumers estimates its total liability for the signif.
icant sites will average less than 4 percent of the estimated total
site remediation costs, and such liability is expected to be less
than $9 million. At December 31, 1995, Consumers has accrued a
liability for its estimated losses.
The Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental
Protection Act (formerly the Michigan Environmental Response
Act) was substantially amended in June 1995. The Michigan law
bears similarities to the federal Superfund law. The purpose of the
1995 amendments was generally to encourage development of
industrial sites and to remove liability from some parties who were
not responsible for activities causing contamination. Consumers
expects that it will ultimately incur investigation and remedial
action costs at a number of sites, including some of the 28 sites
that formerly housed manufactured gas plant facilities, even those
in which it has a partial or no current ownership interest.
Consumers has prepared plans for remedial investigation/
feasibility studies for several of these sites. Three of the four plans
submitted by Consumers have been approved by the DNR or the
Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (a new depart-
ment succeeding to some of the former jurisdiction of the DNR).
The findings for the first remedial investigation indicate that the
expenditures for remedial action at this site are likely to be mini-
mal. However, Consumers does not believe that a single site is rep-
resentative of all of the sites. Data available to Consumers and its
continued internal review have resulted in an estimate for all
costs related to investigation and remedial action for all 23 sites
of between $48 million and $112 million. These estimates are
based on undiscounted 1995 costs. At December 31, 1995,
Consumers has accrued a liability of $48 million and has estab-
lished a regulatory asset for approximately the same amount. Any
significant change in assumptions such as remediation tech-
níque, nature and extent of contamination and legal and regula.
tory requirements, could impact the estimate of remedial action
costs for the sites.
Consumers requested recovery and deferral of certain investi-
gation and remedial action costs in its gas rate case filed in 1994.
Consumers believes that remedial action costs are properly recov-
erable in rates as the MPSC in 1993 addressed the question of
recovery of investigation and remedial action costs for another
Michigan gas utility as part of a gas rate case. In order to be
recoverable in rates, prudent costs must be approved in a rate
case. Any costs amortized in years prior to filing a rate case may
not be recoverable. The MPSC has approved similar deferred
accounting requests by several other similar Michigan utilitiesrelative to investigation and remedial action costs. During 1995,
as part of Consumers' rate case, the MPSC staff and the ALJ
recommended that the MPSC adopt the same accounting and
cost recovery previously provided to other Michigan utilities.
Consumers is continuing discussions with certain insurance
companies regarding coverage for some or all of the costs
which may be incurred for these sites.
The Federal Clean Air Act as amended on November 15, 1990
(Clean Air Act) contains provisions that limit emissions of sulfur
dioxide and nitrogen oxides and require emissions monitoring.
Consumers' coal-fueled electric generating units burn low-sulfur
coal and are presently operating at or near the sulfur dioxide
emission limits which will be effective in the year 2000. The Clean
Air Act's provisions required Consumers to make capital expen-
ditures totaling $25 million to install equipment at certain gen-
erating units. Consumers estimates capital expenditures for
in-process and possible modifications at other coal-fired units to
be an additional $50 million by the year 2000. Final acid rain pro-
gram nitrogen oxide regulations specifying the limits applicable
to the other coal-fired units are expected to be issued in 1996.
Management believes that Consumers' annual operating costs
will not be materially affected.
Capital Expenditures: CMS Energy estimates capital expendi-
tures, including investments in unconsolidated subsidiaries and
new lease commitments, of $856 million for 1996, $775 million for
1997 and $750 million for 1998.
Commitments for Coal and Gas Supplies: Consumers has
entered into coal supply contracts with various suppliers for its
coal-fired generating stations. These contracts have expiration
dates that range from 1997 to 2004. Consumers contracts for
approximately 60-70 percent of its annual coal requirements
which in 1995 totaled $233 million (72 percent was under long-
term contracts). Consumers supplements its long-term contracts
with spot-market purchases to fulfill its coal needs.
Consumers has entered into gas supply contracts with various
suppliers for its natural gas business. These contracts have expi-
ration dates that range from 1996 to 2003. In 1995, Consumers'
gas requirements totaled $694 million (80 percent was under
long-term contracts). In the future, Consumers expects that
approximately 35 percent of its annual gas requirements will be
under long-term contracts. Consumers supplements its long-term
contracts with spot-market purchases to fulfill its gas needs.
Other: As of December 31, 1995, CMS Energy and Enterprises
have guaranteed up to $62 million in contingent obligations of
unconsolidated affiliates of Enterprises' subsidiaries.
CMS NOMECO periodically enters into oil and gas price hedg-
ing arrangements to mitigate its exposure to price fluctuations on
the sale of crude oil and natural gas. These arrangements limit
potential gains/losses from any future decrease/increase in the
spot prices. As of December 31, 1994, CMS NOMECO was party to
gas price collar contracts on 7.3 billion cubic feet (bef) of gas for
the delivery months of January through December 1995 at prices
ranging from $2.05 to $2.35 per million British thermal unit
(MMBtu). As of December 31, 1995, CMS NOMECO also has con-
tracts on 7.4 bcf of gas for the delivery months of January through
May 1996 at prices ranging from $1.89 to $2.18 per MMBtu. These
hedging arrangements are accounted for as hedges; accordingly,
any changes in market value and gains or losses from settlements
are deferred and recognized at such time as the hedged transac-
tion is completed. As of December 31, 1994 and December 31,
1995, the fair values of these hedge arrangements were not mate-
rially different than the book value.
CMS NOMECO also has one arrangement which is used to fix
the prices that CMS NOMECO will pay to supply gas for the years
2001-2006 by purchasing the economic equivalent of 10,000
MMBtu per day at a fixed, escalated price starting at $2.82 per
MMBtu in 2001. The settlement periods are each a one-year
period ending December 31, 2001 through 2006 on 3.65 MMBtu. If
the "floating price," essentially the then current Gulf Coast spot
price, for a period is higher than the "fixed price," the seller pays
CMS NOMECO the difference, and vice versa. If a party's exposure
at any time exceeds $2 million, that party is required to obtain
a letter of credit in favor of the other party for the excess over
$2 million and up to $10 million. At December 31, 1995, a letter
of credit was not required.
Consumers has experienced a number of lawsuits filed against
it relating to so-called stray voltage. Claimants contend that
stray voltage results when small electrical currents present in
grounded electrical systems are diverted from their intended
path. Consumers maintains a policy of investigating all customer
calls regarding stray voltage and working with customers to
address their concerns including, when necessary, modifying the
grounding of the customer's service. At December 31, 1995,
Consumers had 30 separate stray voltage lawsuits awaiting trial
court action, down from 83 lawsuits at December 31, 1994.
In addition to the matters disclosed in these notes, Consumers
and certain other subsidiaries of CMS Energy are parties to
certain lawsuits and administrative proceedings before various
courts and governmental agencies, arising from the ordinary
course of business involving personal injury and property damage,
contractual matters, environmental issues, federal and state
taxes, rates, licensing and other matters.
41Estimated losses for certain contingencies discussed in this
note have been accrued. Resolution of these contingencies is not
expected to have a material impact on CMS Energy's financial
position or results of operations.
15: NUCLEAR MATTERS
In 1993, the NRC approved the design of the spent fuel dry stor-
age casks now being used by Consumers at Palisades. In order to
address concerns raised subsequent to the initial cask loading,
Consumers and the NRC each analyzed the effects of seismic and
other natural hazards on the support pad on which the casks are
placed, and confirmed that the pad location is acceptable to sup-
port the casks. As of December 31, 1995, Consumers had loaded
13 dry storage casks with spent nuclear fuel at Palisades.
In 1996, Consumers plans to unload and replace one of the
loaded casks. In a review of the cask manufacturer's quality
assurance program, Consumers detected indications of minor
flaws in welds in the steel liner of one of the loaded casks.
Although the cask continues to safely store spent fuel and there is
no requirement for its replacement, Consumers has nevertheless
decided to remove the spent fuel and insert it in another cask.
Consumers has examined radiographs for all of its casks and has
found all other welds acceptable. Certain parties, including the
Attorney General, have petitioned the NRC to suspend
Consumers' general license to store spent fuel, claiming that
Consumers' cask unloading procedure does not satisfy NRC regu-
lations. The NRC staff is reviewing the petitions.
The Low-Level Radioactive Waste Policy Act encourages the
respective states, individually or in cooperation with each other,
to be responsible for the disposal of low-level radioactive waste.
Currently, a low-level waste site does not exist in Michigan and
Consumers has been storing low-level waste at its nuclear plant
sites. Consumers began shipping its low-level waste to a site in
South Carolina during 1995 and plans to have all its currently
stored low-level waste removed from the plant sites by the
end of 1996.
Consumers maintains insurance coverage against property
damage, debris removal, personal injury liability and other risks
that are present at its nuclear generating facilities. This insur-
ance includes coverage for replacement power costs for the major
portion of prolonged accidental outages for 12 months after a
21 week exclusion with reduced coverage to approximately
80 percent for two additional years. If certain loss events occur
at its own or other nuclear plants similarly insured, Consumers
could be required to pay maximum assessments of: $30 million
in any one year to Nuclear Mutual Ltd. (NML) and Nuclear Electric
Insurance LTD. (NEIL); $79 million per event under the nuclear
liability secondary financial protection program, limited
42
to $10 million per event in any one year; and $6 million in the
event of nuclear workers claiming bodily injury from radiation
exposure. Consumers considers the possibility of these assess-
ments to be remote.
Under its NML and NEIL policies, Consumers may be entitled
to cash distributions following the discontinued operation of its
nuclear facilities. The amount of any distribution would be deter-
mined by NML and NEIL and would be based, in part, on their
overall underwriting experience.
As an NRC licensee, Consumers is required to make certain
calculations and report to the NRC about the continuing ability of
the Palisades reactor vessel to withstand postulated "pressurized
thermal shock" events during its remaining license life, in light of
the embrittlement of reactor vessel materials over time due to
operation in a radioactive environment. Analysis of recent data
from testing of similar materials indicates that the Palisades
reactor vessel can be safely operated through late 1999. In April
1995, Consumers received a Safety Evaluation Report from the
NRC concurring with this evaluation and requesting submittal of
an action plan to provide for operation of the plant beyond 1999.
Consumers is developing plans to anneal the reactor vessel in
1998 at an estimated cost of $20 million to $30 million. This repair
would allow for operation of the plant to the end of its license life
in the year 2007. Consumers cannot predict whether the studies
being conducted as part of the development plans will support a
future decision to anneal.
16: JOINTLY OWNED UTILITY FACILITIES
Consumers is responsible for providing its share of financing for
the jointly owned facilities. The following table indicates the
extent of Consumers' investment in jointly owned utility facilities:
December 31
Net investment
Ludington-51%
Campbell Unit 3-93.3%
Transmission lines - various
Accumulated depreciation
Ludington
Campbell Unit 3
Transmission lines
1995
$116
332
33
$ 81
238
14
In Millions
1994
$119
337
81
$ 76
224
1117: SUPPLEMENTAL CASH FLOW INFORMATION
For purposes of the Statement of Cash Flows, all highly liquid
investments with an original maturity of three months or less are
considered cash equivalents. Other cash flow activities and
non-cash investing and financing activities for the years ended
December 31 were:
Cash transactions
Interest paid (net of amounts capitalized) $207
Income taxes paid (net of refunds)
34
Non-cash transactions
Nuclear fuel placed under capital lease
Other assets placed under capital leases
Common Stock issued to acquire companies
Assumption of debt
Capital leases refinanced
Sale of receivables, net
Accounts receivable
Accrued revenue
1995
Inventories
Accounts payable
Accrued refunds
Other current assets and liabilitles, net
Non-current deferred amounts, net
$ 26
5
90
20
21
Changes in other assets and liabilities as shown on the
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows at December 31 are
described below:
1995
$ 20
(80)
(24)
43
112
(8)
30
(0)
1994
$ 89
$162
36
$ 21
15
1994
$(10)
(15)
20
(4)
26
(3)
4
(6)
In Millions
1993
$ 12
$193
32
$28
30
42
In Millions
1998
$ 60
22
(48)
(32)
(81)
(49)
(4)
(6)
$(88)
18: REPORTABLE SEGMENTS
CMS Energy operates principally in the following five business
segments: electric utility, gas utility, oil and gas exploration and
production, independent power production, and natural gas
transmission, storage and marketing.
The Consolidated Statements of Income show operating
revenue and pretax operating income by business segment.
Other segment information follows:
Years Ended December 31
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Electric utility
Gas utility
Oil and gas exploration and production
Independent power production
Natural gas transmission, storage
and marketing
Other
Identifiable assets
Electric utility()
Gas utility
Oil and gas exploration and production
Independent power production
Natural gas transmission, storage
and marketing
Other
Capital expenditures (b)
Electric utility
Gas utility
Oil and gas exploration and production')
Independent power production
Natural gas transmission, storage
and marketing
1995
Other
$ 272
83
52
4
3
2
$ 416
1994
303
128
$8,143
$ 257
76
41
2
2—
1
$ 379
$4,522 $4,364
1,690
1,678
660
469
840
536
109
227
$7,378
$ 328 $ 358
126
134
168
115
239
29
In Millions
1993
$ 241
73
45
2
1
2
$364
$4,100
1,628
398
488
75
275
$6,964
$ 403
158
83
110
178
31
5
14
$1,053
$ 672 $ 768
fa/Amounts include an attributed portion of Consumers' other common assets to both
the electric and gas utility businesses.
(5)Includes capital leases for nuclear fuel and other assets and electric DSM costs
14
(see Statement of Cash Flows). Amounts also include an attributed portion of Consumers'
capital expenditures for plant and equipment common to both the electric and gas
utility businesses.
(c)Includes common stock issued for acquisitions.
4319: EFFECTS OF THE RATEMAKING PROCESS
The following regulatory assets (liabilities) which include both
current and non-current amounts, are reflected in the
Consolidated Balance Sheets. These assets represent probable
future revenue to Consumers associated with certain incurred
costs as these costs are recovered through the ratemaking process.
December 81
Postretirement benefits (Note 12)
Income taxes (Note 5)
Abandoned Midland project
DSM - deferred costs (Note 4)
Trunkline settlement
Manufactured gas plant sites (Note 14)
Power purchase contracts (Note 3)
Uranium enrichment facility
Other
Total regulatory assets
Income taxes (Note 5)
DSM-deferred revenue
Other
Total regulatory liabilities
1995
$ 487
176
181
68
55
47
44
25
22
44
In Millions
1994
$ 503
189
147
71
85
47
30
25
31
$1,128
$ (205)
(21)
$1,055
$ (220)
(25)
(1)
$ (246) $ (226)
At December 31, 1995, approximately $778 million of
Consumers' regulatory assets are being recovered through rates
being charged to customers over periods of up to 17 years.
Consumers anticipates MPSC approval for recovery of the
remaining amounts.
20: SUMMARIZED FINANCIAL INFORMATION OF SIGNIFICANT
RELATED ENERGY SUPPLIER
Under the PPA with the MCV Partnership discussed in Note 8,
Consumers' 1995 obligation to purchase electric capacity from
the MCV Partnership was approximately 16 percent of
Consumers' owned and contracted capacity. Summarized financial
information of the MCV Partnership follows:
Statements of Income
Years Ended December 31
Operating revenue fo
Operating expenses
Operating income
1995
1994
$618
$579
386
378
232
201
Other expense, net
171
183
$ 61
$ 18
$ (3)
Net income (loss)
(*)Revenue from Consumers totaled $571 million, $594 million and $505 million for
1995, 1994 and 1993, respectively
Balance Sheets
December 31
Assets
Current assets (*)
Property, plant and equipment, net
Other assets
Liabilities and Partners'¹ Equity
Current liabilities
Long-term debt and other non-current liabilities (
Partners' equity (*)
1995
$ 263
1,948
156
$2,867
In Millions
1993
$548
362
186
189
$ 225
2,008
184
In Millions
1994
$ 206
2,012
154
$2,372
$ 218
2,081
73
$2,372
$2,367
(a)At December 31, 1995 and 1994, $48 million was receivable from Consumers.
(b)FMLP is the sole beneficiary of an owner trust that is the lessor in a long-term direct
finance lease with the lessee, MCV Partnership. CMS Holdings holds a 46.4 percent own-
ership interest in FMLP At December 31, 1995 and 1994, lease obligations of $1.6 billion
and $1.7 billion, respectively were owed to the owner trust. CMS Holdings' share of the
interest and principal portion for the 1995 lease payments was $66 million and $29
million, respectively, and for the 1994 lease payments was $68 million and $14 million,
respectively. The lease payments service $1.1 billion and $1.2 billion in non-recourse
debt outstanding as of December 31, 1995 and 1994, respectively of the owner trust.
FMLP's debt is secured by the MCV Partnership's lease obligations, assets, and operat
ing revenues. For 1995 and 1994, the owner-trust made debt payments (including
interest) of $192 million and $175 million, respectively
(c)CMS Midland's recorded investment in the MCV Partnership includes capitalized
interest, which is being amortized to expense over the life of its investment in the
MCV Partnership.REPORT OF INDEPENDENT PUBLIC ACCOUNTANTS
To CMS Energy Corporation:
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance
sheets and consolidated statements of preferred stock of
CMS Energy Corporation (a Michigan corporation) and sub-
sidiaries as of December 31, 1995 and 1994, and the related
consolidated statements of income, common stockholders'
equity, and cash flows for each of the three years in the period
ended December 31, 1995. These consolidated financial state-
ments are the responsibility of the Company's management.
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these consoli-
dated financial statements based on our audits.
We conducted our audits in accordance with generally
accepted auditing standards. Those standards require that we
plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance
about whether the consolidated financial statements are free
of material misstatement. An audit includes examining on a
test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in
the consolidated financial statements. An audit also includes
Quarters Ended
Operating revenue
Pretax operating income
Net income
Earnings per average
common share:
QUARTERLY FINANCIAL AND COMMON STOCK INFORMATION
CMS Energy
Class G
Dividends declared per
common share:
CMS Energy
Class G
Common stock prices)
CMS Energy:
March 31
$1,117
$ 206
$ 86
$ .99
$ .21
$ 24%
$ 22%
1995 (Unaudited)
June 30
$ 835
$ 124
$ 33
$ .37
$ 21
High
Low
Class G:
High
Low
(*) Based on New York Stock Exchange-Composite transactions.
$25%
$22/2
Sept. 30
$ 869
$ 149
$ 47
$ .54
$(.17)
$ .24
$ .28
$26%
$23%
assessing the accounting principles used and significant esti-
mates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall
consolidated financial statement presentation. We believe
that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements
referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the
financial position of CMS Energy Corporation and subsidiaries
as of December 31, 1995 and 1994, and the results of their
operations and their cash flows for each of the three years in
the period ended December 31, 1995 in conformity with
generally accepted accounting principles.
$18%
$16½
Artha Anden 2CP
Arthur Andersen LLP
Detroit, Michigan
January 26, 1996
Dec. 31
$1,069
$ 124
$ 38
$ .37
$ .55
$ .24
$ .28
$ 30
$26
$ 18%
$ 17%
March 31
$1,140
$ 175
78
$ .92
$ .18
$25
$ 21%
In Millions, Except Per Share Amounts
1994 (Unaudited)
June 30
$ 795
$ 108
$ 30
$.35
$ .18
CMS Energy Corporation
$22%
$19%
Sept. 80
$ 766
$ 125
$40
$ 46
$ .21
$23%
$20%
| |
Dec. 31
$918
$ 95
$31
$ .36
$ .21
$23/
$20%
45SELECTED FINANCIAL INFORMATION
Operating revenue (in millions)(*)
Net income (loss) (in millions)
Average common shares outstanding (in thousands)
CMS Energy
Class G
Earnings (loss) per average common share
CMS Energy
Class G
Cash from operations (in millions)
Capital expenditures, excludes capital lease
additions and DSM (in millions)
{6}
Total assets (in millions)
Long-term debt, excluding current maturities
(in millions)
Non-current portion of capital leases (in millions)
Total preferred stock (in millions)
Cash dividends declared per common share
CMS Energy
Class G
Market price of common stock at year-end
CMS Energy
Class G
Book value per common share at year-end
CMS Energy
Class G
Return on average common equity
Return on assets
Number of common shareholders at year-end
Number of employees at year-end (full time equivalents)
Electric Utility Statistics
Sales (millions of kWh)
Customers (in thousands)
Average sales rate per kWh
Gas Utility Statistics
Sales and transportation deliveries (bcf)
Customers (in thousands)(**
Average sales rate per mcf
Electric and Gas Non-utility Statistics
CMS Energy's share of unconsolidated independent
power production revenue (in millions)
Independent power production sales (millions of kWh)
CMS Energy's share of unconsolidated natural gas
transmission, storage and marketing revenue
(in millions)
Gas marketed for end-users (bcf)
Exploration and Production Statistics
Sales (net equiv. MMbbls)
Proved reserves (net equiv. MMbbls)
Proved reserves added (net equiv. MMbbls)
Finding cost per net equiv. bbl
46
*** ** *** ** ** *** E
($)
($)
($)
($)
($)
1995
3,890
204
88,810
7,511
2.27
.38
682
585
8,148
2,906
106
356
.90
.56
29%8
18%B
15.16
10.56
15.9
5.1
59,983
10,072
35,506
1,570
6.36
404
1,475
4.42
497
7,449
26
101
8.9
111.2
26.8
5.06
(*) Certain prior year amounts were restated for comparative purposes.
(0) Amount in 1991 included an extraordinary loss of $14 million, after tax or $.18 per average common share.
(c) Excludes off-system transportation customers.
1994
3,614
179
85,888
2.09
612
575
7,878
2,709
108
356
.78
22%
12.78
17.3
4.7
63,628
9,972
34,462
1,547
6.29
409
1,448
4.48
385
6,216
7
66
5.6
93.3
29.0
5.92
1993
3,476
155
81,251
|
1.90
484
550
6,958
2,405
115
163
.60
25%
11.33
18.3
4.5
66,795
10,013
32,764
1,526
6.28
411
1,423
4.46
334
5,019
3
60
5.0
69.8
3.9
4.97
CMS Energy Corporation
1992
3,142
(297)
79,877
(3.72)
456
487
6,842
2,725
98
163
.48
18%8
9.09
(33.2)
(2.3)
70,801
9,971
31,601
1,506
5.82
384
1,402
4.55
284
4,057
45
4.6
70.9
15.0
4.88
1991
2,994
(276)
79,988
|
(3.44)
530
353
6,194
1,941
68
163
.48
18%
13.28
(22.4)
(0.6)
72,729
9,212
31,818
1,492
5.73
362
1,382
4.58
246
3,342
23
4.0
60.3
16.0
6.58SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION
1996 ANNUAL MEETING:
CMS Energy Corporation's 1996 annual meeting is scheduled for
10:30 a.m. on May 24 at the Dearborn Inn, Dearborn, Michigan.
Proxy material will be mailed in April.
STOCK OWNERSHIP:
In June of 1995, the period allowed for the settlement of stock
transactions was shortened to three days. This change does not
require that your shares be held by a broker. You can still keep
your shares registered in your name and enjoy the benefits of
direct communication to and from CMS Energy. (For more infor-
mation on direct and indirect ownership, please contact the
Investor Services Department for a copy of the brochure "Stock
Ownership: What Every Investor Should Know.")
SHAREHOLDER CONTACTS:
Inquiries about stock ownership, change of address, dividend
payments, dividend reinvestment, or the Stock Purchase Plan may
be directed to:
Investor Services Department
212 W. Michigan Ave.
Jackson, MI 49201
(517) 788-1868
For financial and operating information, please contact:
Investor Relations Department
(517) 788-2590
212 W. Michigan Ave.
Jackson, MI 49201
OBTAINING REPORTS:
Shareholders may obtain without charge and exclusive of
exhibits: CMS Energy's Form 10-K; a Financial and Statistical
Supplement to the Annual Report; and an audiocassette
recording of the annual report text. Please address requests to
the Investor Services Department.
DIRECT DEPOSIT AND AUTOMATIC INVESTMENT:
CMS can deposit your dividends directly into your bank account.
We also offer automatic investment from your bank account to
purchase CMS common stock and Class G common stock and
keep your investment in CMS Energy growing. Please contact the
Investor Services Department for more information.
STOCK PURCHASE PLAN:
Investors can buy and sell shares of CMS Energy common stock
and Class G common stock directly through the Corporation's
Stock Purchase Plan. Other plan features include dividend rein-
vestment, certificate safekeeping, direct deposit of dividends,
automatic investment, and gifting of shares. For more informa-
tion and a plan prospectus, please contact the Investor Services
Department.
ELIMINATING DUPLICATE MAILINGS:
To maintain more than one account, but eliminate duplicate mail-
ings of annual and quarterly reports, send the labels from com-
pany mailings to the Investor Services Department, indicating the
names you wish to keep on the mailing list. (Dividend checks and
proxy materials will continue to be sent to each account.)
CONSOLIDATING ACCOUNTS:
To consolidate separate accounts into one account, contact the
Investor Services Department.
STOCK EXCHANGE LISTINGS:
CMS Energy common stock is listed on the New York Stock
Exchange under the symbol CMS. Class G common stock also is
listed, under the symbol CPG.
TRANSFER AGENT, REGISTRAR, AND PAYING AGENT:
Investor Services Department, 212 W. Michigan Ave.,
Jackson, Michigan 49201
TRUSTEE, CHS ENERGY SENIOR DEFERRED COUPON NOTES:
NBD Bank, N.A., 611 Woodward Ave., Detroit, Michigan 48226
TRUSTEE, CMS ENERGY GENERAL TERM NOTES:
The Chase Manhattan Bank, 4 Chase MetroTech Center,
Brooklyn, New York 11245
Follow 13 Energy on the Internet: http://www.cmsenergy.com
47OFFICERS
CMS ENERGY
William T. McCormick Jr., 51
Chairman of the Board and
Chief Executive Officer
Victor J. Fryling, 48
President and Chief Operating Officer
Michael G. Morris, 49
Executive Vice President
Alan M. Wright, 50
Senior Vice President, Chief Financial
Officer and Treasurer
Rodger A. Kershner, 47
Senior Vice President and
General Counsel
John W. Clark, 51
Senior Vice President, Communications
nes W. Cook, 55
Senior Vice President, Technology
and Development
Preston D. Hopper, 45
Senior Vice President, Planning
and Accounting
Thomas A. McNlsh, 58
Vice President and Secretary
Laura L. Mountcastle, 39
Vice President, Investor Relations
CONSUMERS POWER
William T. McCormick Jr., 51
Chairman of the Board
Victor J. Fryling, 48
Vice Chairman of the Board
Michael G. Morris, 49
President and Chief Executive Officer
Paul A. Elbert, 46
Executive Vice President and
Chief Operating Officer, Natural Gas
David W. Joos, 42
Executive Vice President and
Chief Operating Officer, Electric
Alan M. Wright, 50
Senior Vice President and
Chief Financial Officer
48
John W. Clark, 51
Senior Vice President, Communications
David A. Mikelonis, 47
Senior Vice President and
General Counsel
Dennis DaPra, 53
Vice President and Controller
Kenneth C. Emery, 48
Vice President, Information Technology
and Operations Services
Carl L. English, 49
Vice President, Electric Distribution
Robert A. Fenech, 48
Vice President, Nuclear Operations
Doris F. Galvin, 41
Vice President and Treasurer
Royal P. Lefere Jr., 48
Vice President, Electric Marketing
and Pricing
John E. Manczak, 48
Vice President, Gas Marketing
and Pricing
Thomas A. McNish, 58
Vice President and Secretary
Robert J. Nicholson, 56
Vice President, Fossil and
Hydro Operations
Paul N. Preketes, 46
Vice President, Gas Operations
David V. Volgt, 60
Vice President, Electric Transmission
CMS NOMECO OIL & GAS CO.
Victor J. Fryling, 48
Chairman of the Board
Gordon L. Wright, 53
President and Chief Executive Officer
William H. Stephens III, 46
Executive Vice President and
General Counsel
Paul E. Gelger, 53
Vice President, Secretary and Treasurer
Robert A. Dunn, 49
Vice President, Exploration
T. Rodney Dykes, 39
Vice President, Operations,
Africa and Middle East
Richard L. Redmond Jr., 39
Vice President, Operations,
Western Hemisphere/Southeast Asia
CMS GENERATION CO.
Victor J. Fryling, 48
Chairman of the Board
Rodney E. Boulanger, 55
President and Chief Executive Officer
Naren K. Bhatla, 60
Vice President, Engineering
and Construction
Thomas W. Elward, 47
Vice President, Operations
John M. McLaughlin Jr., 45
Vice President, Business Development
Joseph P. Tomasik, 41
Vice President, Business Development
Martin R. Walicki, 45
Vice President, Finance
David W. Weaver, 46
Vice President, Asia
CMS GAS TRANSMISSION AND STORAGE
Victor J. Fryling, 48
Chairman of the Board
William J. Haener, 54
President and Chief Executive Officer
Martin R. Walicki, 45
Vice President, Finance
Karl R. Wittbold, 39
Vice President
CMS GAS MARKETING &
CMS ELECTRIC MARKETING
Victor J. Fryling, 48
Chairman of the Board
William W. Schivley, 49
President and Chief Operating Officer
i
i
Desinn Addison Corporate Annual Reports, NYCCMS BOARD OF DIRECTORS
William T. Vetormick fr, it,
Chairman of the Board and
Chúgj Karculier (hver if
CMS Energy and Chairman of
Cimsumers Pouer. Dactor of
Flest Chienyo ABD Corporation.
fortwett International
Corporation and
Schlumberger Li
Director since 1985.
Kathleen P. Flaherty, tr
Nalimuat Murkælinų Kreciar,
Irritish Ilocana, Landm,
England: Minector since 1995
William 1. Furtot, t9,
Kuchairman, MPI Reseurek,
Mattawas, Kick, Director of
Phuomacia & Upjutny fac. Old
Kent Financial Curporutum,
Stryker Corporation, and
Thivernal Fauds Corporatiem.
Dimetar smee 1991.
Victor I. Pryling, 43,
President and Chief Operating
Officer of CITS Buergy and
Vice Chairman of NOVNIMOYA
Pinces, Director since 190ti
Burt 13 Nattra, 02.
Pirsulent and Chief Operating
Qliner Meijer Ina
Grand Rapúls, Mick
Director of Meffer Ini, and
Old Bint PinuNGUDE
Corporation
Hirective since 1980
Perry A Pierre, 37
Professor of Electrical
Engineering, Michigan State
University, Bast Lansing
Miche. Dincter of Old Kent
Finaveunt Corporation
Director since HI!M
Michnet G. Morris, 49
Kaucaliu Vier Presidend of
CMS Enervy and President.
and Chief Recrutier (ffficer of
Consumers Power Elected
director in February 1906.
Los A Land 68
Profesor College of Huvaan
Roology Michigan State
University East Lansing,
Much. Hinchur since 1981
Kenneth Filample, 61,
Ewentziz Vice President
Pant Motor Compang and
President Ford Frencial
Sermos Group, Deitetsoru,
Mich. Director since 1981
James J. Duderstadt,
President. The tiniversity of
Michigan. Ann Arbon Mush
Director of tuisyS
Corporatum and the
Therversity of Michigan
Hospitals Director since 1998
Frank H. Morlatti, 69,
Chairman of the Executive
Committee, Apelcane frio,
(hand Kopida, Mich.
Director of Steelcame fro
Lasise Alignment und
Oliver Products. Thractur
since 1987
John B. Yasinslig. 66.
Chairman and Chief
Executive Chfiere, Bentorn.
Fuarlaven, Ohio. Diretur of
GenCarp. Iliretor since 1994.CMS ENERGY
World Headquarters
Fairlane Plaza South
Suite 1100
330 Town Center Drive
Dearborn, MI 48126
Principal Offices
Bogotá, Colombia
Buenos Aires, Argentina
Houston, Texas
Jackson, Michigan
New Delhi, India
Singapore
Washington, D.C.
34874
Bulk Rate
U.S. Postage
PAID
CMS Energy
Corporation