Environmental Commitment
Even as we do our best to maintain
strong financial performance in a more
competitive future, we are addressing the
ongoing challenge to protect the
environment as we provide an essen-
tial service to the people of Central
Eastern Pennsylvania.
As we clearly point out in the en-
vironmental values statement that we
developed in 1991, we are committed
to serving our customers in a manner
that protects the environment for pres-
ent and future generations. We man-
age our business to minimize wastes
and emissions that affect the environ-
ment. As a company, we manage and
conserve natural resources, we protect
environmental diversity and we pro-
mote energy efficiency.
Because we've done more than sim-
ply comply with previous laws on
sulfur dioxide emissions, we expect
only a small increase in customer costs
about 1 percent will be needed
to comply with the first phase of the
Clean Air Act amendments passed last
year by Congress. Because we have
been making sub antial improvements
over the years, the early reductions at
our plants will come, in part, from the
burning of lower-sulfur coal.
The later reductions, however, will
involve the installation of "scrubbers"
on some of our generating units.
While the Clean Air Act amendments
will result in a cleaner environment for
all of us, PP&L has been working
toward this goal for some time.
Our actions continue to demonstrate
our clear commitment to the environ-
ment. Our land management programs
have earned awards, but more impor-
tantly, they have increased environ-
mental awareness among people in our
service area. The Montour Preserve,
Susquehanna Riverlands, the Holtwood
recreation areas and Lake Wallen-
paupack are excellent examples of en-
vironmental commitment at work to-
day in our communities.
We are adding to our environmental
programs in 1992. In the spring we
will be giving away more than 120,000
fir seedlings in a program called "Trees
for the Future." The program will
stress the importance of environmental
awareness and education.
Another environmental concern
among some of the people in our ser-
vice area is the question of EMFS -
the electric and magnetic fields present
near electrical appliances and our
facilities. Although the current scien-
tific evidence does not demonstrate a
health problem, we are sensitive to the
concerns of our customers. For that
reason, we are meeting with cus-
tomers, offering to measure EMF levels
in their homes and businesses and pro-
vide them with information. We're
even taking steps to reduce EMFS.
where practical, in the design of new
transmission and distribution facilities.
We are responding to the percep.
tions of our customers as well as to
the cold scientific "facts."
Deregulation Issues
In a way, perception also is the
challenge we face as Congress con-
siders legislation that would change
the very nature of our business. In
light of the deregulation that has oc-
curred in other major industries over
the years, there is a perception by
some in the federal government that
the nation would be better served with
a deregulated electric utility industry.
While this is a complicated question.
we must be careful not to put the
long-term best interests of the nation
at risk. Our position on the deregula-
tion issue is clear: we support action
that will maintain competitive, stable
rates for PP&L customers while main-
taining the reliability of electric supply.
None of the electric utility deregula-
tion proposals now being discussed
adequately deal with the challenge of
maintaining system reliability.
The decisions on these matters must
result in the highest long-term eco-
nomic productivity of the nation.
Some of the deregulation schemes be-
ing discussed would benefit certain
special interest users of the electric
supply system while putting the
average customer, particularly resi-
dential customers, at an economic
disadvantage.
In addition, some of the deregula-
tion scenarios would allow indepen-
5
dent power suppliers to enter and
leave the electric business as they see
fit, without regard to any obligation to
serve customers. This is not in the best
interest of the nation and the general
public because electricity is a service
that is essential to the very survival of
Our way of life.
You can be sure that we will con-
tinue to be active in helping to shape
the future of the utility industry.
As we step forward in the 1990s, the
world is changing and so is PP&L. We
are concentrating on our competitive
situation, we are looking beyond to-
day's operational concerns and assess-
ing what we need to do to realize our
vision for the future.
Thanks to your continuing support.
PP&L is a healthy company, a company
that can effectively plan for the future
with the confidence that our 72 years
of success have given us.
We have a vision. We have the lead-
ership in place to get us there. We
have the strategies to provide the
pathway.
We will succeed because we're not
shrinking from the uncertain future.
We're planning to manage the future in
a way that will assure continued suc-
cess for your company.
teurir
John T. Kauffman
T. Kauffman
William F. Hocht
William F. Hecht
March 1. 1992