In the strategic repositioning of the company, the acquisition of NorAm is an important step. We
will continue to lock for opportunities in our domestic business to build value for shareholders in
the future.
Our international operations have the potential to provide attractive earnings growth and will
continue to play an important role in our strategy in 1997 and beyond. Our subsidiary, Houston
Industries Energy, has aggressively pursued opportunities in growing foreign markets and has own-
ership/operating positions in electric distribution systems serving more than 3 million customers
in Brazil and Argentina. HI Energy also owns, operates or is in the process of building cogeneration
plants in Argentina and India. The addition of NorAm's natural gas expertise will allow us to offer
multiple forms of energy to customers and develop greenfield projects in these markets as well.
In January 1997, as part of the merger integration process, we established a new organizational
framework to bring the NorAm businesses into HI. Steve Letbetter, formerly president of Houston
Lighting & Power Company, was named president and chief operating officer of Houston
Industries, a position that had been vacant. Mr. Letbetter will oversee the operations of three new
operating divisions: HI Power Generation, Hl Retail Energy Group and HI Trading and
Transportation Group. Our traditional electric utility operations, excluding power generation, fit
within the retail energy group as will the NorAm natural gas distribution operations and HI
Energy's foreign projects. The chart and map on the foldout provide an overview of the organiza-
tion and operations of the combined company.
As you may have gathered by now, the days of electric companies as local firms that never ven-
ture outside their service territories are gone forever. As today's electric and, more broadly, energy
companies respond to developing opportunities, strategies for growth will increasingly resemble
those of leading companies in other industries. Unlike the traditional utility investments, leading
companies in this emerging industry will be much more growth oriented. We will be one of those.
At Houston Industries, we are committed to a vision of becoming a major national and interna-
tional energy company. Our strategies for the future, explained in this annual report, hold the keys
to our success in a dynamic world.
Jordan
Don D. Jordan
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer